ACR TI-RADS is a reporting system for thyroid nodules on ultrasound proposed by the American College of Radiology (ACR) 1.This uses a standardized scoring system for reports providing users with recommendations for when to use fine needle aspiration (FNA) or ultrasound follow-up of suspicious nodules, and when to safely leave alone nodules that are benign/not suspicious.
Radiographic featuresScoring and classificationRecommendationsRisk of malignancyDevelopments leading to ACR TI-RADS 2017Practical pointsComparison with other classification systemsRevisionsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresScoring is determined from five categories of ultrasound findings (figure 2).
The higher the cumulative score, the higher the TR (TI-RADS) level and the likelihood of malignancy.
One score is assigned from each of the following categories:composition: (choose one)cystic or completely cystic *: 0 pointsspongiform *: 0 pointsmixed cystic and solid: 1 pointsolid or almost completely solid: 2 pointsechogenicity: (choose one)anechoic: 0 pointshyper- or isoechoic: 1 pointhypoechoic: 2 pointsvery hypoechoic: 3 pointsshape: (choose one) (assessed on the transverse plane)wider than tall: 0 pointstaller than wide: 3 pointsmargin: (choose one)smooth: 0 pointsill-defined: 0 pointslobulated/irregular: 2 pointsextra-thyroidal extension: 3 pointscystic or completely cystic *: 0 pointsspongiform *: 0 pointsmixed cystic and solid: 1 pointsolid or almost completely solid: 2 pointsanechoic: 0 pointshyper- or isoechoic: 1 pointhypoechoic: 2 pointsvery hypoechoic: 3 pointswider than tall: 0 pointstaller than wide: 3 pointssmooth: 0 pointsill-defined: 0 pointslobulated/irregular: 2 pointsextra-thyroidal extension: 3 pointsAny and all findings in the final category are also added to the other four scores.echogenic foci: (choose one or more)none: 0 pointslarge comet-tail artifact: 0 pointsmacrocalcifications: 1 pointperipheral/rim calcifications: 2 pointspunctate echogenic foci: 3 pointsnone: 0 pointslarge comet-tail artifact: 0 pointsmacrocalcifications: 1 pointperipheral/rim calcifications: 2 pointspunctate echogenic foci: 3 pointsThe findings in each category were detailed in the ACR committee's 2015 publication on a reporting lexicon 2.
If multiple nodules are present only the four highest-scoring nodules (not necessarily the largest) should be scored, reported, and followed up.*
Predominantly cystic or spongiform nodules are inherently benign.
If these features are present no further points will be added (automatically TR1)TR1: 0 pointsbenignTR2: 2 pointsnot suspiciousTR3: 3 pointsmildly suspiciousTR4: 4-6 pointsmoderately suspiciousTR5: ≥7 pointshighly suspiciousbenignnot suspiciousmildly suspiciousmoderately suspicioushighly suspiciousTR1: no FNA requiredTR2: no FNA requiredTR3: ≥1.5 cm follow up, ≥2.5 cm FNAfollow up: 1, 3 and 5 yearsTR4: ≥1.0 cm follow up, ≥1.5 cm FNAfollow up: 1, 2, 3 and 5 yearsTR5: ≥0.5 cm follow up, ≥1.0 cm FNAannual follow up for up to 5 yearsfollow up: 1, 3 and 5 yearsfollow up: 1, 2, 3 and 5 yearsannual follow up for up to 5 yearsFNA biopsy is recommended for suspicious lesions (TR3-TR5) with the above size criteria.
If there are multiple nodules, the two with the highest ACR TI-RADS scores should be sampled (rather than the two largest), with largest size being used a tie-breaker if there are multiple nodules of the same classification.
Interval enlargement on follow-up is significant if there is an increase of >20% and >2 mm in two dimensions or a >50% increase in volume.
If the ACR TI-RADS level increases between scans, an interval scan the following year is again recommended.
The projected risk of malignancy in the original 2017 paper 1 was based on partial analysis of 3433 nodules with cytological results.
Partial analysis at the time of publication showed rates of <2% for TR1/TR2, 5% for TR3, 5-20% for TR4 and >20% for TR5 nodules.
The final analysis 4 demonstrated a stepwise increase for each point awarded by ACR TI-RADS, with each category validated.
The published malignancy rates are:TR1: 0.3%TR2: 1.5%TR3: 4.8%TR4: 9.1%TR5: 35%The previous ACR white paper from 2015 2 developed a lexicon from descriptive reports and this has been updated by the stratified scoring system in the 2017 white paper, rather than relying on a pattern-based system.
Outcomes and recommendations are supported by another ACR paper on incidental thyroid nodules 3 and data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER) programme of the National Cancer Institute.
The 2015 reporting lexicon 2 included 6 stages with a number of subdivisions (not replicated in this ACR TI-RADS) with increasing risk of malignancy.
The ACR system does not provide a grade for "normal thyroid gland" unlike other thyroid reporting systems, preserving ACR TI-RADS for lesion reporting.
TR1 instead includes benign simple and/or spongiform cysts, each meeting 0 points from the criteria.
Purely anechoic/cystic lesions are assigned 0 points, whereas if described as "very hypoechoic" they would be assigned 3 points leading to a likely fruitless FNA and probable patient/physician anxiety.
Frank invasion of surrounding structures is a unfavorable prognostic sign and is assigned 3 points.
If minimal extrathyroidal extension is suspected without frank invasion, especially with otherwise benign features, caution and experience should be used when reporting.
"Punctate echogenic foci" can encompass both microcalcifications and inspissated colloid, depending on technique and size of the colloid foci in a nodule.
Unlike microcalcifications, foci of inspissated colloid are not associated with malignancy and they often appear differently to microcalcifications on closer inspection.
Inspissated colloid is not a high risk feature.
The ACR system was published in 2017, preceded by K-TIRADS (2017) and followed by EU-TIRADS (2017).
Other systems including the ATA and SRU 5 are also in regular use.
Comparative studies show the ACR system has a sensitivity ranging 75-97% and specificity ranging 53-67%, which is either the highest sensitivity and lowest specificity amongst compared systems 6, or, to the contrary, the highest specificity 7,8.
With the latter two studies, the ACR system had the greatest overall performance (measured by area under the receiver operating characteristic curve or accuracy), resulting in lower rates of unnecessary fine needle aspiration (false positive rates) 7,8.Good interobserver agreement regarding decision to biopsy has also been shown (Cohen kappa 0.61) 9.No formal revisions to ACR TI-RADS have been made at present, although one group used artificial intelligence to refine the algorithm, with maintained high sensitivity, increased specificity, and reduced FNA rates 10.

Acrania anencephaly sequence is the progression from a relatively normal-appearing exposed brain due to an absent cranium (acrania) to an amorphous brain mass (exencephaly) to no recognisable brain tissue (anencephaly) 1.EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresReferencesCases and figuresThe acrania anencephaly sequence begins with acrania, which is the most common anomaly affecting the central nervous system with an incidence of ~1:1000 pregnancies 1.The abnormality occurs at the beginning of the fourth week of gestation when the anterior neuropore closes.
The normal migration of mesenchymal tissue which is supposed to form the cranium does not occur.
The overlying ectoderm remains the only covering as a thin amnion-like membrane.
The calvarium, muscles of the scalp and the dura are not formed.
In the absence of induction from the neurocranium, the cerebral tissue fails to differentiate into two hemispheres 2.Acrania exposes the brain to the amniotic fluid with a risk of friction with the uterine wall, placenta and fetal parts; this condition is called exencephaly 3.
In this circumstance, the unprotected brain tissue undergoes progressive destruction and degeneration due to mechanical and chemical trauma, leading to complete or almost complete disappearance of the brain from 14 weeks' gestation onward.
The damaged brain tissue can be seen on ultrasound as echogenic particles in the amniotic fluid 4.In the first trimester scans, there is a normal amount of brain tissue present which when seen in the coronal plane of fetus results in the Mickey Mouse sign due to two semicircular structures floating above the fetal face just like the rounded ears of Mickey Mouse.
In the second trimester, a significant amount of brain tissue is lost, resulting in the frog face sign due to an absence of recognisable tissue superior to the level of the fetal orbits 3.

Acrania is a rare lethal congenital anomaly characterized by an absence of the calvaria.
EpidemiologyPathology Radiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresThe estimated incidence is at ~1:1000 pregnancies 4.
The condition is thought to result from abnormal migration of mesenchymal tissue, which normally covers the cerebral hemispheres.
The calvarial bones are partially or entirely absent with relative (albeit abnormal) preservation of development of the cerebral hemispheres.
A thin membrane surrounds the cerebral hemispheres.
As the ossification of the fetal cranium begins and accelerates after nine weeks, antenatal ultrasound allows diagnosis from 11 weeks onwards.
It is important to look specifically for frontal bone ossification in the axial and coronal planes.
Acrania is lethal and can progress to anencephaly through the acrania-anencephaly sequence 8.Imaging differential considerations include conditions such as:meroacrania: preservation of occipital bone (sometimes considered as part of acrania spectrum) 4anencephaly/exencephaly: has absent/deficient brain tissue as wellcongenital hypophosphatasiaachondrogenesissevere osteogenesis imperfecta: additional findings such as bowing, shortening, or fractures of long bones often aid in distinction from acraniacalvarial defect(s) due to an amniotic band

The causes of acro-osteolysis can be remembered using the mnemonic:PINCH FOP: psoriasis/pyknodysostosisI: injury, e.g. thermal burn, frost biteN: neuropathy, e.g. diabetes mellitus, leprosyC: collagen vascular disease, e.g. scleroderma, Raynaud diseaseH: hyperparathyroidismF: familial, e.g. Hajdu-Cheney syndromeO: other, e.g. polyvinyl chloride exposure, progeriaacro-osteolysis

Acro-osteolysis (plural: acro-osteolyses) refers to resorption of the distal phalanx.
The terminal tuft is most commonly affected.
It is associated with a heterogeneous group of pathological entities and, some of which can be remembered by using the mnemonic PINCH FO.When there is linear bone resorption of the midshaft of the distal phalanx with a relatively spared terminal tuft, the condition is also referred to as band acro-osteolysis and carries a more limited differential diagnosis.scleroderma 4Raynaud diseasepsoriatic arthritisthermal injury extreme cold: frostbiteextreme heat: burns, electricitytraumahyperparathyroidismepidermolysis bullosaporphyriadrugsphenytoin (occurs in infants of epileptic mothers treated with phenytoin) 7ergot poisoning/abuseinsensitivity to pain, e.g. leprosy, congenital insensitivity to painjuvenile chronic arthritisdermatomyositisvascular occlusion 5reactive arthritis 6pityriasis rubra pilaris (very rare skin condition) 8pachydermoperiostosis 9extreme cold: frostbiteextreme heat: burns, electricityphenytoin (occurs in infants of epileptic mothers treated with phenytoin) 7ergot poisoning/abusepolyvinyl chloride (PVC) exposure 10primary acro-osteolysis: Hajdu-Cheney syndromehyperparathyroidism (also causes terminal tuft resorption)scleroderma 11 (also causes terminal tuft resorption)idiopathic non-familial acro-osteolysis 15pyknodysostosis 13, 14 (also causes terminal tuft hypoplasia)biomechanical in guitar players 11epidermal inclusion cyst 3glomus tumor of digit 3

Acrocephalopolysyndactyly (ACPS) syndrome is comprised of a rare group of disorders collectively characterized by:calvarial anomalies: e.g. craniosynostosesdigital anomalies: syndactyly and polydactylyWhile there can be some overlap in features, they can be primarily classified into the following major typestype I: Noack syndrometype II: Carpenter syndrome (most common 1)type III: Sakati-Nyhan syndrometype IV: Goodman syndromeacrocephalosyndactyly syndromes (when there is no polydactyly)

Acrocephalosyndactyly syndromes (ACS) are a rare group of disorders collectively characterized by:calvarial anomalies, e.g. craniosynostosesdigital anomalies, e.g. syndactylyWhile there can be some overlap in features, they can be primarily classified into the following major types:type I: Apert syndrome 1type II: Apert-Crouzon syndrome 5type III: Saethre-Chotzen syndrome 3type IV: Goodman syndrome 6type V: Pfeiffer syndromeothersRobinow-Sorauf syndromeRobinow-Sorauf syndromeWhen there are calvarial anomalies with polydactyly and syndactyly, these then fall into group named acrocephalopolysyndactyly syndromes (ACPS).
However, many suggest that the distinction between ACS and ACPS should be abandoned ref.

Acrodysostosis is a rare skeletal dysplasia characterized by growth retardation, nasal hypoplasia, brachydactyly, midfacial deficiency, intellectual disability and deafness.
PathologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresReferencesMost cases are sporadic.
Few cases with autosomal dominant transmission have been reported.
It is believed to occur because of advanced paternal age, however, no chromosomal abnormality has been detected.
The cardinal clinical features include, short hands with stubby fingers and similarly affected feet and toes.
In addition to that, vertebral abnormalities, flat face due to severe nasal hypoplasia, abnormally large mandible and dental malocclusion, pigmented skin, menstrual irregularities in females and mild to moderate intellectual disability are other associated clinical findings.
There is severe shortening of nasal bone, metacarpals, metatarsals and phalanges.
Premature fusion of epiphysis.
Abnormal cone-shaped epiphysis and epiphyseal stippling are common radiological features.

Acromegaly is the result of excessive growth hormone production in skeletally mature patients, most commonly from a pituitary adenoma.
The same excess of growth hormone in individuals whose epiphyses have not fused will result in gigantism (excessively tall stature).
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAcromegaly is most commonly diagnosed in middle-aged adults and can result in severe disfigurement, serious complicating conditions, and premature death.
It has both an insidious onset and slow progression and may be difficult to diagnose in the early stages, only being diagnosed when the external features, especially those of the face, become noticeable.
Clinical presentation is often with a variety of relatively non-specific symptoms or medical problems.
These include: headache, described more often as "head pain" (due to dural tension)muscle pain, often misdiagnosed as fibromyalgiajoint painarthritisvertebral fractures with or without loss of bone mineral densitycarpal tunnel syndromecardiovascularcardiomegalyhypertensionheart failureinsulin resistance leading to diabetes mellitusrenal failurepalmar sweating and seborrheacardiomegalyhypertensionheart failureIn contrast, examination of the patient will often reveal a very characteristic constellation of physical signs:overgrowthenlargement of the hands, feet, nose, tongue, lips and earsgeneral thickening of the skin (including cutis verticis gyrata)internal organs (especially heart and kidneys)vocal cords, resulting in a characteristic thick, deep voice and slowing of speechskull, frontal bossingmandible: prognathism with gaping teethskin changeshypertrichosishyperpigmentationhyperhidrosisenlargement of the hands, feet, nose, tongue, lips and earsgeneral thickening of the skin (including cutis verticis gyrata)internal organs (especially heart and kidneys)vocal cords, resulting in a characteristic thick, deep voice and slowing of speechskull, frontal bossingmandible: prognathism with gaping teethhypertrichosishyperpigmentationhyperhidrosisApproximately 95% of cases are the result of a pituitary adenoma 10.
The remaining 5% of cases are the result of other tumors of the pancreas, lungs, or adrenal glands that release growth hormone.
A very small number of cases result from the excessive use of exogenous growth hormone in athletes.
Typically shows elevated levels of:growth hormoneIGF-1 (insulin growth factor 1)Calvarial thickening, particularly of the inner table 10, frontal bossing, enlarged paranasal sinuses (especially frontal sinuses) and an enlarged sella turcica.
The mandible also characteristically enlarges resulting in prognathism and gaps between the teeth 10.
This appearance is sometimes referred to as a "lantern jaw" 11 although this merely a descriptive term, not unique to acromegaly.
Evidence of vertebral body fractures, most commonly in the thoracolumbar region lead researchers to recently state that radiographic screening of this region is indicated 4.
Vertebral fracture without loss of bone mineral density is related to increased bone turnover markers seen in acromegaly 4.
Other features seen in the spine include a DISH-like appearance, posterior vertebral scalloping, increased verterbral height, elongation and widening of the vertebral bodies.
Joints will show the typical patterns of osteoarthritis, and will continue to deteriorate even after biochemical remission is achieved, which is why it is prudent in the clinical setting to monitor the progression of "acromegalic arthropathy" 6,7.
There has also been a reported higher incidence of crystal deposition disease.
Terminal phalangeal tufts become hypertrophied and have a "spade appearance", which is called the spade phalanx sign.
Joint spaces may be minimally enlarged.
Premature osteoarthritis can occur in the advanced stages of acromegaly.
Heel pad thickness may be increased (>25 mm).Three steps of acromegalic cardiomyopathy have been described 9:early phase (reversible): initial cardiac hypertrophy, increased heart rate and systolic output, defined as the hyperkinetic syndromemiddle phase of untreated or uncontrolled disease: cardiac hypertrophy with signs of diastolic dysfunctionend-stage of untreated disease (not reversible): dilated cardiomyopathyOther joints may show ligamentous and cartilaginous hypertrophy, and crystal deposition 7.Enlarged pituitary with increased gadolinium uptake.
The MR diagnosis of a pituitary macroadenoma is relatively straightforward.
Dynamic contrast-enhanced MR increases the sensitivity for detecting microadenomas.
Microadenomas are hypoenhancing compared to the normal pituitary gland.
Hypertrophy of spinal ligaments and cartilaginous structures and features of osteoarthritis 7.The treatment of choice is resection of the secreting adenoma, usually via the transsphenoidal approach.
Alternatively, especially in surgically-refractory cases, treatment is with primary somatostatin receptor ligand, with or without concomitant growth hormone receptor antagonist therapy 3.
Radiation therapy is also used in medical circumstances where other therapies have not been able to control tumor size, growth and production of excess growth hormone.
The most frequently used radiation therapy for acromegaly is gamma knife, with more traditional techniques, including image-guided radiation therapy, associated with increased risk of cerebrovascular mortality.
The severity of symptoms and comorbidities for acromegaly patients is directly related to the level of elevated hormone as well as length of time that the patient was exposed to a high level versus a high-normal, or normal level, making identification and proper diagnosis of great importance 4,6,7.
Mortality rates can decrease to those of the general population if appropriate diagnosis and treatment are achieved to normalize serum growth hormone and IGF-1 levels 5.The word "acromegaly" is derived from the Greek words akros "extremities" and megalos "large".
In 2011 the AIP gene mutation was linked to acromegalic gigantism, found when studying four Irish families who displayed acromegalic and gigantism traits, known as childhood-onset acromegaly (i.e. when a child has gigantism which progresses through adulthood to acromegaly).
It is said that there could be hundreds of carriers of this mutant gene, leading researchers to suggest that all childhood-onset acromegaly patients, especially those who have a family history of pituitary adenoma or acromegaly, should be screened and followed 8.

Acromial apohysiolysis is a finding on shoulder MRI that may be encountered in patients with an unfused acromial apophysis.
It is associated with athletes in throwing sports.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisPractical pointsSee alsoReferencesPresents with superior shoulder tenderness in a patient <25 years old, often in a young throwing athlete (~100 pitches/week in American baseball).
May clinically mimic a shoulder labral tear.
Repetitive stress across a meta-acromion-meso-acromion type unfused acromion.
The injury is analogous to epiphysiolysis at incompletely fused growth plates.
STIR / PD FSincreased signal intensity across an unfused acromionSTIR sequence is useful to avoid inhomogeneous fat suppressionT1decreased signal intensity across an unfused acromionincreased signal intensity across an unfused acromionSTIR sequence is useful to avoid inhomogeneous fat suppressiondecreased signal intensity across an unfused acromionPatients are usually treated conservatively, with rest and NSAIDs.
It is associated with an eventual os acromiale formation (86% vs. 4% control) and rotator cuff tear (after age >25 years) if the cause of the shoulder stress is not discontinued.in a throwing athlete with shoulder pain, edema signal intensity across an unfused acromial apophysis, and no other cause for shoulder pain consider acromial apophysiolysisos acromiale

The shape of the acromion had been initially divided into three types (which was known as the Bigliani classification) 3, to which a fourth has been added 2.
They are used as a standardized way of describing the acromion, as well as predicting to a degree the incidence of impingement.
This classification was initially proposed by Bigliani et al.
in 1986 on outlet view radiographs, and later modified by Kitay et al.
7 and Vanarthos et al.
in 1995, which remains the most widely accepted classification at the time of writing (July 2016).Acromion morphology (types) are based on sagittal oblique MRI:parallel to the humeral head with a concave undersurface considered most common type 3the most anterior portion of the acromion has a hooked shapeassociated with increased incidence of shoulder impingementmost recent classification of acromion process shapethe undersurface of the acromion is convex near the distal end 4no convincing correlation between a type 4 acromion and impingement syndrome exists 4, 5acromioclavicular joint configuration

Acromioclavicular joint injuries are characterized by damage to the acromioclavicular joint and surrounding structures.
Almost invariably traumatic in etiology, they range in severity from a mild sprain to complete disruption.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisPractical pointsSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresAcromioclavicular joint injuries usually occur from a direct blow or following a fall onto the shoulder with an adducted arm.
This pushes the acromion forcibly inferiorly and medially with respect to the clavicle 7.
Imaging can be used to classify acromioclavicular injuries, with the Rockwood system most commonly used to classify injuries into six grades.
Other described grading systems include the Tossy and the Allman classification systems.
In most cases, plain films (including an axillary view) are sufficient for accurate grading although CT or MRI may be useful in cases where plain films are thought to underrepresent the degree of injury.
Standard acromioclavicular joint radiographs consist of a clavicle series including an AP and cephalic angled oblique (10-15º) views.
Additional weight-bearing stress views may be of benefit if:initial radiographs are normal, but an injury is suspectedsurgical intervention on a type III injury would be contemplated (see below) 7These are performed with the patient erect and holding a weight in the arm.
If the joint is normal, then acromioclavicular alignment should remain normal and symmetric.
Features of acromioclavicular joint injury include 6:soft tissue swelling/strandingmay be the only finding in type I injurieswidening of the acromioclavicular joint normal: 5-8 mm (narrower in the elderly)greater than 2-4 mm asymmetry (compared to radiographs of the contralateral side)increased coracoclavicular distancenormal: 10-13 mmgreater than 5 mm asymmetry (compared to the contralateral side)superior displacement of the distal claviclethe inferior edge of the acromion should be level with the inferior edge of the claviclemay be the only finding in type I injuriesnormal: 5-8 mm (narrower in the elderly)greater than 2-4 mm asymmetry (compared to radiographs of the contralateral side)normal: 10-13 mmgreater than 5 mm asymmetry (compared to the contralateral side)the inferior edge of the acromion should be level with the inferior edge of the clavicleTreatment largely depends on the age and lifestyle of the patient as well as the type of injury.
In general types I and II are treated conservatively, types IV, V, and VI are treated surgically, and type III injuries are variably treated 4.
Type I and II (+/- III): conservative management consists of ice, analgesics and shoulder rest in a sling.
Type III: the current evidence does not support surgical intervention on type III injuries as a general rule.
The selection of which patients with type III injuries for surgical intervention is difficult, but patients who are particularly thin, require a great range of motion or do heavy lifting may benefit from operative repair 4-5.
Types IV-VI (+/- III): surgical internal fixation is typically achieved with a hook plate, which in most cases needs to be eventually removed.
K-wires have also been used, although rare cases of wire migration into vital organs, has dissuaded many surgeons from using them 4.
Just as an injury to other joints, prior acromioclavicular dislocation predisposes the joint to osteoarthritis.
Surgical complications include migration of hardware and infection.
In addition to commenting on whether or not a subluxation/dislocation is present a number of features should be examined and commented upon:presence of soft tissue swellingdegree of subluxation of the clavicle type II: inferior border of clavicle not elevated beyond the superior border of the acromiontype III: inferior border of the clavicle is elevated beyond the superior border of the acromion, but the coracoclavicular distance is not greatly increased (less than twice normal)type V: marked superior elevation of the clavicle with coracoclavicular distance more than twice normaldirection of dislocation (use axillary view)posteriorly into trapezius: type IVinferiorly below the coracoid process: type VIany fractures presentglenohumeral joint alignmenttype II: inferior border of clavicle not elevated beyond the superior border of the acromiontype III: inferior border of the clavicle is elevated beyond the superior border of the acromion, but the coracoclavicular distance is not greatly increased (less than twice normal)type V: marked superior elevation of the clavicle with coracoclavicular distance more than twice normalposteriorly into trapezius: type IVinferiorly below the coracoid process: type VIA careful inspection of the periphery of the film is also required, to ensure no rib fracture, pneumothorax or incidental lung, mediastinal or osseous lesion is present.
These do not usually constitute 'relevant negatives' and as such, no comment is required.
upper extremity dislocations

The acromioclavicular (AC) joint radiographic series is used to evaluate the acromioclavicular joint and the distal clavicle.
AC radiographs are performed for a variety of indications including: shoulder traumadirect blows to the should regionfollowing a fall onto adducted armsuspected dislocationsuspected arthritisAP viewerect view demonstrating the AC joint in the anteroposterior planebest view to inspect widening of the AC jointerect view demonstrating the AC joint in the anteroposterior planebest view to inspect widening of the AC jointAP with weight bearingalso known as a stress view, the patient holds onto a weight on the affected side, placing inferior pressure on the AC jointthis view is used to rule out displacement when it is suspected yet not confirmed on the AP viewAP comparison viewsboth AC joints are imaged separately, to rule out a suspected displacement or differentially anatomical variation Zanca viewAP projection with a 10-15 degree cephalad angle to free the AC joint from superimposition also known as a stress view, the patient holds onto a weight on the affected side, placing inferior pressure on the AC jointthis view is used to rule out displacement when it is suspected yet not confirmed on the AP viewboth AC joints are imaged separately, to rule out a suspected displacement or differentially anatomical variation AP projection with a 10-15 degree cephalad angle to free the AC joint from superimposition

The acromioclavicular AP view is a single projection assessing the patency of the acromioclavicular joint.
See also, acromioclavicular joint injuries.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesCases and figurespatient is erectmidcoronal plane of the patient is parallel to the image receptor, in other words, the patient's back is against the image receptoracromioclavicular joint of the affected side is at the center of the image receptoraffected arm is in a neutral position by the patient sideanteroposterior projection centering pointat the acromioclavicular jointcollimationsuperior to the skin marginsinferior to the humeral headlateral to include the skin marginmedial to lateral third of the clavicleorientation  landscapedetector size18 cm x 24 cmexposure60-70 kVp10-15 mAsSID100 cmgridyes (this can vary departmentally)at the acromioclavicular jointsuperior to the skin marginsinferior to the humeral headlateral to include the skin marginmedial to lateral third of the claviclelandscape18 cm x 24 cm60-70 kVp10-15 mAs100 cmyes (this can vary departmentally)the acromioclavicular joint is central to the image with no overlapIt is not uncommon for additional projections to be requested, most commonly a bilateral view.
Contrary to popular belief that the divergence beam will obscure the critical anatomy, one must take into account that the 'amount' of divergence for each joint will be equal.

The acromioclavicular AP weight-bearing view is an additional interjection often performed to rule out displacement when it is suspected but not confirmed on the AP viewSee also, acromioclavicular joint injuries.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesCases and figuresthe patient is erect holding a weight in the affected sides handthe midcoronal plane of the patient is parallel to the image receptor, in other words, the patient's back is against the image receptorthe acromioclavicular joint of the affected side is at the center of the image receptoraffected arm is in a neutral position by the patient sideanteroposterior projection centering pointat the acromioclavicular jointcollimationsuperior to the skin marginsinferior to the humeral headlateral to include the skin marginmedial to lateral third of the clavicleorientation  landscapedetector size18 cm x 24 cmexposure60-70 kVp10-15 mAsSID100 cmgridyes (this can vary departmentally)at the acromioclavicular jointsuperior to the skin marginsinferior to the humeral headlateral to include the skin marginmedial to lateral third of the claviclelandscape18 cm x 24 cm60-70 kVp10-15 mAs100 cmyes (this can vary departmentally)the acromioclavicular joint is central to the image with no overlapthe image is appropriately annotated weight-bearingThis projection can be very painful for a patient with an AC joint injury; it is highly recommended that everything is set up and positioned, so the last thing you do is hand the weights over.

The Zanca view is a specialized projection of the acromioclavicular joint, it is used to both demonstrate the AC joint free from superimposition, and aid in the assessment of distal osteophytes.
See also, acromioclavicular joint injuries.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figurespatient is erectmidcoronal plane of the patient is parallel to the image receptor, in other words, the patient's back is against the image receptoracromioclavicular joint of the affected side is at the center of the image receptoraffected arm is in a neutral position by the patient sideanteroposterior projectioncentering pointat the acromioclavicular joint with a 10-15 cephalad angle collimationsuperior to the skin marginsinferior to the humeral headlateral to include the skin marginmedial to lateral third of the clavicleorientation  landscapedetector size18 cm x 24 cmexposure40-50 kVp10-15 mAsSID100 cmgridno at the acromioclavicular joint with a 10-15 cephalad angle superior to the skin marginsinferior to the humeral headlateral to include the skin marginmedial to lateral third of the claviclelandscape18 cm x 24 cm40-50 kVp10-15 mAs100 cmno the acromioclavicular joint is free from superimposition The differences between this projection and a standard AP are the cephalic angle and the decrease in kVp.

There is much variation in acromioclavicular joint configuration, which may be confused with pathology.
The relationship of the acromion to the distal clavicle at the AC joint can be described in the coronal plane as 1-3:horizontal: normallow-lying: associated with shoulder impingement (unfortunately, there are no criteria for distinguishing a low-lying acromion from a high-riding clavicle) 2inferolateral: associated with shoulder impingement

Acromiohumeral interval is a useful and reliable measurement on AP shoulder radiographs and when narrowed is indicative of rotator cuff tear or tendinopathy.
PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresMeasurements of the acromiohumeral interval in the following intervals are suggestive of pathology 1,2:>12 mm: shoulder dislocation; inferior subluxation (e.g. from joint effusion)9-10 mm (range 8-12 mm): normal6-7 mm: thinning of supraspinatus tendon<6 mm: supraspinatus tearThe shortest distance is measured.
true AP shoulder radiographmeasure from the cortical bone at the inferior aspect of the acromion to the humeral head 3can also be performed on coronal and sagittal oblique T1 MR imagesinferior aspect of the acromion (marked by black line directly above the humeral head) directly inferiorly to the center of the subchondral cortex of the humeral head 3superior humeral head subluxationnormal radiographic measurements of the shoulder

The acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) is a plane synovial joint (diarthrodial joint) of the pectoral girdle.
Gross anatomyArterial supplyInnervationVariant anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe acromioclavicular joint is between the small facet of the convex distal clavicle and flat medial acromion.
The articular surfaces are lined with fibrocartilage (like the sternoclavicular joint, it is an atypical synovial joint).
A fibrocartilaginous wedge-shaped articular disc, measuring between 1.5-4.0 mm 8, separates the two articular surfaces, but its function is unknown 2,6.
There are three types of disc 8-11:complete disc (rare)meniscoid-like discsuperior and inferior wedge-shaped meniscoid discA weak, synovium-lined joint capsule is attached to the articular margins and is reinforced superiorly by blending fibers of the trapezius muscle 6.No muscles act directly on this joint.
In turn, it permits passive movements only.
Instead, the basic scapular movements of protraction/retraction, rotation and elevation/depression transmit to corresponding movements to AC joint.
Static stabilization is provided by: coracoclavicular ligament: main stabilizer 2,5coracoacromial ligament superior and inferior acromioclavicular ligaments: reinforce the relatively weak joint capsule 5Dynamic stabilization is also provided by the deltoid and trapezius muscles, with the superior acromioclavicular ligament blending with these muscles' aponeuroses.
Forces transmitted from the upper limb to the glenoid are transmitted to the clavicle via the trapezoid ligament, largely bypassing the acromioclavicular joint.
This means that a fall onto an outstretched hand or elbow can spare the ACJ (but fracture the mid-shaft of the clavicle) while falls onto the shoulder itself may dislocate the ACJ by forcing the acromion to sublux under the clavicle and tear the coracoclavicular ligament.
7suprascapular and thoracoacromial arteries 6axillary, suprascapular and lateral pectoral nerves 2,6acromioclavicular joint configurationos acromialeacromioclavicular joint erosionacromioclavicular joint injuryRockwood classificationAllman and Tossy classificationRockwood classificationAllman and Tossy classification

The acromion process is the lateral projection of the scapula spine that extends anteriorly.
Fractures of the scapula are uncommon injuries and account for ~3% of all shoulder fractures 1,2 while isolated acromion fractures occur rarely and account for only 9% of all scapular fractures 3.PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAcromial fractures usually occur as the result of direct trauma to the shoulder or superior dislocation of the humeral head 4.Shoulder radiographs are the first diagnostic investigation and the lateral scapula shoulder or Y view is an excellent projection to evaluate the coracoid and acromion process 5.Computed tomography is sometimes necessary when the shoulder radiographs are normal and when there is high clinical suspicion of acromial injury.
MRI and US exams are also helpful in the assessment of the soft tissues of the shoulder region 4,6.Three types of acromial fracture are defined by Kuhn et al 7 which can help to determine whether surgical or non-surgical treatment is appropriate: type I: minimally displacedtype II: displaced but does not reduce the subacromial spacetype III: displaced with narrowing of the subacromial spaceType I and II acromial fractures are usually managed with non-surgical treatment while type III fractures usually require surgery to prevent secondary impingement.
A variety of surgical techniques can be used and include 7,8:tension band wiringreconstruction plateKirshner wireOs acromiale is an unfused acromion accessory ossification center which is relatively common and found in ~8% of the population 9,10.
It is bilateral in ~ 60% of individuals 11.

The acromion (plural: acromia), also known as the acromial process, is a small projection of the scapula that extends anteriorly from the spine of the scapula.
Gross anatomyArterial supplyVariant anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesIt forms the acromioclavicular joint (ACJ) with the lateral third of the clavicle and also connects with the coracoid process via the coracoacromial ligament.mid-portion of deltoid muscle originates from the acromion 1acromioclavicular ligament attaches to the claviclecoracoacromial ligament attaches to the coracoiddeltoid musclecoracoacromial ligamentacromioclavicular ligamentsubacromial-subdeltoid bursaprimary nutrient branch of the subscapular artery and suprascapular arteries 2There are three classifications of the acromion that can be labeled using the inferior surface shape of the acromion 1type 1: flat acromiontype 2: curved acromiontype 3: hooked acromionacromioclavicular joint (ACJ) injury

Acroparesthesia refers to tingling, pins-and-needles, burning or numbness or stiffness in the hands and feet, particularly the fingers and toes 1.
Occasionally episodic pain is also present, which can be very severe 1.
Is one of the more common manifestations of Fabry disease (more common than the better known ischemic events) 1, carpal tunnel syndrome, and other peripheral nerve lesions.

In neural networks, activation functions perform a transformation on a weighted sum of inputs plus biases to a neuron in order to compute its output.
Using a biological analogy, the activation function determines the “firing rate” of a neuron in response to an input or stimulus.
These functions introduce non-linearities into the neural networks enabling them to perform complex tasks such as image recognition and language processing.
Without non-linear activation functions, artificial neural networks behave as simple linear regression models.
Such functions include:sigmoid functionrectified linear unit (ReLU) function hyperbolic tangent (Tanh) function

Acute abdominal pain is a common acute presentation in clinical practice.
It encompasses a very broad range of possible etiologies and diagnoses, and imaging is routinely employed as the primary investigative tool in its modern management.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesA subgroup of patients with acute abdominal pain will have a so-called acute abdomen (also known as an acute surgical abdomen).
This is restricted to those with an acute presentation of abdominal pain coupled with serious morbidity, a tender abdomen and marked rigidity (a.k.a.
involuntary guarding) on abdominal physical examination.
It is estimated that approximately 5% presentations to a typical emergency department are for acute abdominal pain 1.Acute abdominal pain includes a wide spectrum of severity and differing character, with qualifying descriptors, such as sharp, colicky, dull, etc.
The list of causes of acute abdominal pain is extremely long, and can be subdivided in a multiplicity of ways.acute visceral inflammationacute appendicitisacute cholecystitisacute pancreatitisbowel obstructionsmall bowel obstructionlarge bowel obstructionbowel ischemiaacute diverticulitisbiliary colicrenal colicpyelonephritispeptic ulcer disease: gastric or duodenal ulcerabdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA)inflammatory bowel diseaseCrohn diseaseulcerative colitismesenteric adenitispregnancy: sometimes it maybe 'concealed', i.e. patient may not even be aware!acute appendicitisacute cholecystitisacute pancreatitissmall bowel obstructionlarge bowel obstructionCrohn diseaseulcerative colitisMeckel diverticulitispsoas abscessrectus sheath hematomaspontaneous splenic ruptureepiploic appendagitisomental infarctionovarian torsionsalpingitistubo-ovarian abscessruptured ectopic pregnancypenetrating abdominal injuryblunt abdominal injurypost-operativemedicationsradiotherapyMany medical conditions can present with an acute abdominal pain.
In some cases it may be an atypical presentation of a common condition (e.g. myocardial ischemia), or a typical presentation of a rare condition (e.g. porphyria).
This list is not exhaustive.thoracicmyocardial infarctionangina pectorispneumoniaBornholm diseaseinfectiongastroenteritis: many organismsacute hepatitisintestinal anthraxpneumococcal peritonitisshingles (herpes zoster)urinary tract infection (UTI)tuberculosismalariatyphoid fevercholeratabes dorsalisinfectious mononucleosis: splenic ruptureendocrinediabetes mellituspheochromocytomathyrotoxic crisis (thyroid storm)musculoskeletalepidemic myalgiaabdominal muscle injury e.g. rectus abdominis muscle strainCyriax syndromevasculitisHenoch-Schonlein purpura (HSP)polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)miscellaneoussickle cell disease: acute crisislead toxicityopiate withdrawal: classically heroinporphyriaselenosismyocardial infarctionangina pectorispneumoniaBornholm diseasegastroenteritis: many organismsacute hepatitisintestinal anthraxpneumococcal peritonitisshingles (herpes zoster)urinary tract infection (UTI)tuberculosismalariatyphoid fevercholeratabes dorsalisinfectious mononucleosis: splenic rupturediabetes mellituspheochromocytomathyrotoxic crisis (thyroid storm)epidemic myalgiaabdominal muscle injury e.g. rectus abdominis muscle strainCyriax syndromeHenoch-Schonlein purpura (HSP)polyarteritis nodosa (PAN)sickle cell disease: acute crisislead toxicityopiate withdrawal: classically heroinporphyriaselenosisfunctional dyspepsiairritable bowel syndrome (IBS)functional abdominal pain syndromefunctional gallbladder disorderopioid bowel syndrome 3CT of the abdomen and pelvis is the first-line investigation for many presentations of acute abdominal pain.
Traditionally, the plain abdominal radiograph was the initial investigation but has fallen out of favor due to its poor sensitivity and specificity for many of the causes of abdominal pain.
Historically the plain abdominal radiograph was mandatory in every patient presenting with an acute abdomen.
to be completedIn the pre-CT era, patients with an acute abdomen were often sent for urgent surgery.
Contemporaneously, with the virtually ubiquitous availability of CT, some of these patients will not be operated on at all.
Conversely, some patients who do not meet the traditional criteria for an "acute abdomen" will be diagnosed on imaging with conditions, such as acute appendicitis, and be sent for surgery.

The acute abdominal series is a common set of abdominal radiographs obtained to evaluate bowel gas.
IndicationsProjectionsPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe acute series is used for a variety of indications including: determine the amount of bowel gas, with possible bowel distentionassess air-fluid levelsquery pneumoperitoneumAP supine viewPA erect viewPA erect chest radiographThe majority of the information is obtained from the AP supine view 1.
The erect view adds more information about air-fluid levels.
The erect PA chest radiograph is the more sensitive view for pneumoperitoneum (and chest pathology can sometimes present as abdominal pain).Some have advocated eliminating the PA erect view from the series 3.
Indeed in the UK the erect abdominal radiograph has virtually disappeared from clinical practice, studies in the 1980s show that the erect projection rarely changed management 4.The following is the modified acute series for patients who are unable to stand.
In this series, the left lateral decubitus view is the most sensitive for evaluation of intraperitoneal free gas.
AP supine viewleft lateral decubitus viewAP supine chest radiographAP supine viewleft lateral decubitus viewAP supine chest radiographIn order to adequately evaluate for free intraperitoneal gas, the patient should be positioned in the erect and decubitus views for enough time to allow small amounts of free gas to drift up to the diaphragm or lateral liver edge, respectively.
This often takes ~5-10 minutes.

Acute acalculous cholecystitis refers to the development of cholecystitis in a gallbladder either without gallstones or with gallstones where they are not the contributory factor.
It is thought to occur most often due to biliary stasis and/or gallbladder ischemia.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAcute acalculous cholecystitis represents 5-10% of cases of acute cholecystitis.
Risk factors for acute acalculous cholecystitis include 2:severe tissue injury (e.g. major trauma and burns)postoperative (especially following major surgery e.g. valvular replacement 13) diabetes mellitusmalignancyvasculitiscongestive heart failureshockcardiac arrestadvanced age 12concomitant opioid therapypositive-pressure ventilation (PPV)total parenteral nutrition (TPN)Acute acalculous cholecystitis usually occurs in critically ill or injured patients (e.g. trauma, burns, sepsis).
The risk factors listed above may affect the perfusion of the gallbladder and favor bile stasis leading to injury and inflammation.
Subsequent ischemia-reperfusion injury to the gallbladder is also a central pathogenic feature 2,9.
A rare cause of acalculous cholecystitis occurring in patients with advanced cancer is gallbladder metastases 10.When there are no gallstones, the diagnosis is more obvious.
May show gallbladder wall edema, pericholecystic fluid, and gallbladder distention (the first two considered the two most important criteria 2).
The sonographic Murphy sign may be positive.
A sonolucent intramural layer or “halo” that represents intramural edema may also be present.
A sonogram may be considered highly suggestive of the diagnosis with two of the following major criteria, or one major and two minor criteria fulfilled 14;major criteriagallbladder wall thickness > 3 mmwall striationpericholecystic fluidsonographic Murphy signintramural gasmucosal sloughingminor criteriaechogenic bile or sludge in the lumentransverse diameter greater than 5 cmgallbladder wall thickness > 3 mmwall striationpericholecystic fluidsonographic Murphy signintramural gasmucosal sloughingechogenic bile or sludge in the lumentransverse diameter greater than 5 cmTc-99m iminodiacetic acid cholescintigraphy is considered a highly reliable test and may be performed even in acutely ill patients.
Ideally, there is non-visualization of the gallbladder.
The importance of recognizing acalculous cholecystitis lies in the fact that these patients have a high rate of recurrence when treated with medical management.
As such, cholecystectomy is the definitive treatment.
However, patients that are not fit for surgery can undergo percutaneous or endoscopic biliary drainage as an alternative therapy, though cholecystectomy may still be performed when the patient improves.

Acute airspace opacification with lymphadenopathy is a subset of the differential diagnosis for generalized airspace opacification and includes:post-obstructive causes (usually chronic, but 'new' changes can occur)primary lung cancerpulmonary metastases lymphoma/leukemiainfectionprimary pulmonary tuberculosisfungal lung infectionatypical lung infection, e.g. EBV, mycoplasmaprimary lung cancerpulmonary metastases lymphoma/leukemiaprimary pulmonary tuberculosisfungal lung infectionatypical lung infection, e.g. EBV, mycoplasma

Acute aortic syndrome (AAS) describes the presentation of patients with one of a number of life threatening aortic pathologies that give rise to aortic symptoms.
The spectrum of these aortic emergencies include:aortic dissectionaortic intramural hematomapenetrating atherosclerotic ulceraortic aneurysmal rupture (leak)traumatic aortic injurythoracic aortic injuryabdominal aortic injurythoracic aortic injuryabdominal aortic injury

Acute aspiration pneumonitis refers to a form aspiration pneumonia where the time of onset is rapid.
Features can be variable and can range from a pulmonary edema pattern to areas of consolidation.
These changes may have a gravity dependent distribution.
In contrast to a chronic etiology, there is no or little evidence of prominent septal lines, regions of bronchiectasis/bronchioloectasis and/or presence of a reticular interstitial pattern.pulmonary aspiration syndromesaspiration bronchiolitis

The complications of acute bacterial meningitis can be remembered using the mnemonic:HACTIVEH: hydrocephalusA: abscessC: cerebritis / cranial nerve lesionT: thrombosisI: infarctV: ventriculitis/vasculopathyE: extra-axial collection: empyema and hygromapyogenic meningitis

Acute occlusion of the basilar artery may cause brainstem or thalamic ischemia or infarction.
It is a true neuro-interventional emergency and, if not treated early, brainstem infarction results in rapid deterioration in the level of consciousness and ultimately death.
It is one of the posterior circulation infarctions.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresOcclusions of the posterior circulation arteries are related to a fifth of all strokes, and basilar artery occlusion is rare (~1% of all strokes) 9.Patients with acute occlusion of the basilar artery will present with sudden and dramatic neurological impairment, the exact characteristics of which will depend on the site of occlusion:sudden death/loss of consciousnesstop of the basilar syndromevisual and oculomotor deficitsbehavioral abnormalitiessomnolence, hallucinations and dream-like behaviormotor dysfunction is often absentproximal and mid portions of the basilar artery (pons) can result in patients being 'locked in' 7-8complete loss of movement (quadriparesis and lower cranial dysfunction)preserved consciousnesspreserved ocular movements (often only vertical gaze) 8visual and oculomotor deficitsbehavioral abnormalitiessomnolence, hallucinations and dream-like behaviormotor dysfunction is often absentcomplete loss of movement (quadriparesis and lower cranial dysfunction)preserved consciousnesspreserved ocular movements (often only vertical gaze) 8Acute occlusion of the basilar artery can be due to either thromboembolism,  atherosclerosis or propagation of intracranial dissection.
Although these may occur anywhere, each of these have predilections for different segments of the basilar artery:vertebrobasilar junctionthromboembolism (e.g. cardioembolic)atherosclerosis with thrombosispropagation of vertebral arterial dissection (rare)midsegmentatherosclerosis with thrombosisdistal third or basilar tipthromboembolic (e.g. top of the basilar syndrome)thromboembolism (e.g. cardioembolic)atherosclerosis with thrombosispropagation of vertebral arterial dissection (rare)atherosclerosis with thrombosisthromboembolic (e.g. top of the basilar syndrome)Remains the gold standard for the diagnosis of basilar artery occlusion.
However, DSA is used only after non-invasive imaging for therapeutic recanalization 9 (see case 1).
Images demonstrate a filling defect within the vessel.transcranial Dopplerabsence of signal in the basilar arteryindirect signs such as abnormal waveforms in the vertebral arteries and collateral flowabsence of signal in the basilar arteryindirect signs such as abnormal waveforms in the vertebral arteries and collateral flownon-contrast CThyperdense basilar artery (the basilar artery equivalent of the hyperdense MCA sign), present in ~65% 9a high index of suspicion is needed in the correct clinical setting as the diagnosis can easily be missed (often only present on 1 or 2 slices); additionally it is well recognized that acute clots are of lower attenuation than chronic clots 5-6hypoattenuation delineates tissue with ischemic damage (limitations due beam-hardening artifacts limit the visualization of the brainstem on CT)contrast CTCTA: filling defect within the vesselCT perfusion: distinguishes ischemic penumbra area from an irreversibly damaged area (infarct core)hyperdense basilar artery (the basilar artery equivalent of the hyperdense MCA sign), present in ~65% 9a high index of suspicion is needed in the correct clinical setting as the diagnosis can easily be missed (often only present on 1 or 2 slices); additionally it is well recognized that acute clots are of lower attenuation than chronic clots 5-6hypoattenuation delineates tissue with ischemic damage (limitations due beam-hardening artifacts limit the visualization of the brainstem on CT)CTA: filling defect within the vesselCT perfusion: distinguishes ischemic penumbra area from an irreversibly damaged area (infarct core)loss of flow void within the basilar artery on spin-echo and FLAIR imagesDWI: restricted diffusion within infarcted tissueFLAIR/T2: hyperintense signal within infarcted tissueAcute occlusion of the basilar artery is a life threatening event, which carries a terrible prognosis: ~ 90% mortality depending on the location, and high morbidity in the survivors 3.Treatment usually involves catheter-directed intra-arterial thrombolysis and intravenous heparin, which carries a risk of hemorrhage of up to 15%.
Mechanical embolectomy with a clot retrieval device has been used in selected cases.

Acute bilateral airspace opacification is a subset of the larger differential diagnosis for airspace opacification.
An exhaustive list of all possible causes of acute bilateral airspace opacities is long, but a useful way to consider the huge list is via the material within the airways:infections, including aspirationbacterial lung infectionfungal lung infectionviral lung infectionfluid (primary differential if there is cardiomegaly)pulmonary edemabloodpulmonary contusionpulmonary hemorrhage anticoagulationbleeding diatheses Goodpasture syndromeembolipulmonary embolism (PE)fat embolismamniotic fluid embolismalveolar sarcoidosisARDSbacterial lung infectionfungal lung infectionviral lung infectionpulmonary edemapulmonary contusionpulmonary hemorrhage anticoagulationbleeding diatheses Goodpasture syndromeanticoagulationbleeding diatheses pulmonary embolism (PE)fat embolismamniotic fluid embolism

Acute bronchitis (plural: bronchitides) refers to acute-onset, short-term bronchial inflammation.
It is usually self-limiting and often the result of a viral infection.
Chest radiography is rarely necessary.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesAcute bronchitis can affect people of all ages, but it is commonest in children, especially those under the age of 3 years.
It is often associated with the common cold, a sore throat and/or flu.
The main symptom is a hacking cough that may be associated with sputum production.
Sputum is usually yellow or clear and different from the green sputum that is more often associated with lower respiratory tract infections.
Patients will often have nasal and sinus infection and describe a runny nose or sinus symptoms which include pain.
As well as cough and sputum production, patients may describe other general symptoms including wheezing, shortness of breath, chest pain and headache.
Acute bronchitis is usually an inflammatory reaction to a virus.
However, rarely, there may a bacterial cause, or possibly an inflammatory response to an irritant, e.g. smoke, dust or fumes.
Chest radiographs are not routinely indicated in cases of simple acute bronchitis.
Indications for chest x-rays in adult patients with acute bronchitis are primarily to evaluate for pneumonia and include 1:tachycardiatachypneafever >38ºCegophony or fremitus on examinationThese are usually normal.
Sometimes, bronchial wall thickening, which is non-specific, is attributed to acute bronchitis 1,2.
Treatment is supportive, consisting of analgesia and sometimes bronchodilators 2.

Acute calcific periarthritis is an acutely painful monoarticular condition characterized by the juxta-articular deposition of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals and local inflammation.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAffects both males and females over a wide age range, however, occurs more frequently in females than males between the ages of 40 to 70 years.sudden onset of severe pain and swelling around one joint, usually of finger or toeno history of acute traumano fever, systemic complaints or arthralgia of other jointsAcute juxta-articular soft tissue deposition of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals leading to an acute inflammatory response.
ACP is thought to represent a clinical subset of hydroxyapatite deposition disease (HADD) and occurs when crystals are acutely deposited in the periarticular capsular structures:HADD in tendons results in calcific tendonitisHADD in bursa results in calcific bursitisHADD in shoulder joint results in Milwaukee shoulderWell-circumscribed ovoid or curvilinear calcification adjacent to a joint (usually on one side).curvilinear/ovoid calcification with acoustic shadowingcapsular soft tissue swellingperiarticular calcificationgenerally low signal from calcificationhigh signal on fluid weighted sequences from soft tissue edemainfectious arthritis (soft tissue calcification is not seen in acute septic arthritis)tendon-related HADDgoutCPPDOther causes of soft tissue calcification such as:heterotopic ossificationtumoral calcinosisacute calcific periarthritis should be considered when faced with an acutely painful finger, especially in the presence of periarticular calcification on radiographs or ultrasound.recognizing the clinical presentation with correlation of imaging would avoid unnecessary treatments such as antibiotics or surgerymanaged conservatively with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugsmay require corticosteroid injectionusually responds to treatment within a week with resolution of the acute symptomsperiarticular calcification significantly decreases in 3-to-4 weeks but takes  longer to clear, typically 6-to-8 weeks

Acute cerebellitis and acute cerebellar ataxia represent a spectrum of inflammatory processes characterized by sudden onset cerebellar dysfunction.
It usually affects children and is related as a consequence of primary or secondary infection, or much less commonly as a result of a post-vaccination reaction.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe terms acute cerebellitis and acute cerebellar ataxia are sometimes used interchangeably, as in this article, but they are considered separate by some authors 9.
Acute cerebellar ataxia is a clinical diagnosis that can be made without imaging evidence of cerebellar inflammation.
Acute cerebellitis may be considered a less common and more severe form of acute cerebellar ataxia 9,10.
Usually occurring in children under six years of age, acute cerebellar ataxia and acute cerebellitis represent the most common cause of acute ataxia in the pediatric population.
It is reported as a complication of several systemic infectious diseases, such as varicella infection (chickenpox) 6.
Adult cases of cerebellitis are possible 5.
A broad range of signs and symptoms may be present: fever, tremor, nystagmus, truncal ataxia, dysarthria, headache, nausea, vomiting and consciousness alterations.
Signs of meningeal irritation and seizures may be observed less frequently 1,4.
Some relevant complications have been described, such as:obstructive hydrocephalus and consequent intracranial hypertension tonsillar herniation cerebellar trunk compression severe cerebellar atrophy 3CSF pleocytosis 4 Acute cerebellitis has been associated with a large number of infectious agents, such as: coxsackievirus, echovirus, enteroviruses, Epstein-Barr virus, hepatitis A, herpes simplex virus I, human herpesvirus 6, measles, rubella, mumps, parvovirus B19, Borrelia burgdorferi (Lyme disease), malaria, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and typhoid fever 2,4,6.Acute cerebellar ataxia following vaccination for varicella, hepatitis B, and rabies has been reported 6-8.
Cerebellar images can be normal due to the limitations of CT in evaluation of the posterior fossa.
Nonetheless, complications like compression of the brain stem and obstructive hydrocephalus, when present, are identified on CT images and may guide further investigation.
Usually, the cerebellar hemispheres are symmetric.
It may show a homogeneous mass effect due the cerebellar swelling 1,4.
T1: cortical hypointensity  T2/FLAIR: cortical hyperintensity DWI/ADC: may show restriction due to cytotoxic edema caused by the acute inflammatory lesions 4T1 C+ (Gd): cortical and adjacent leptomeninges may show enhancement The disease is generally benign and self-limited, however some complications, as described above, can take the patient to a worse prognosis and lead to death.
In rare complicated cases a massive cerebellar edema can require a surgical decompression of the posterior cranial fossa 4.Clinical features and the age group are essential when thinking of possible differential diagnoses.
Acute cerebellitis limited to one cerebellar hemisphere may mimic a cerebellar tumor, especially:Lhermitte-Duclos diseasemedulloblastoma: atypical cerebellar location usually seen in adult patients cerebellar lymphoma: elderly patientsparaneoplastic opsoclonus-myoclonus syndrome

Acute cholangitis, or ascending cholangitis, is a form of cholangitis and refers to the acute bacterial infection of the biliary tree.
It is a condition with high mortality that necessitates emergent biliary decompression.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe classical presentation is the Charcot triad of fever, right upper quadrant abdominal pain, and jaundice, which is only seen in ~40% of patients.
Patients can also present with Reynold pentad, which is Charcot triad with shock and altered mental status 1,3,4.
Gram-negative enteric bacteria, most commonly Escherichia coli, are the primary pathogens 4.
Acute cholangitis is seen in the setting of biliary tree obstruction 1,3:choledocholithiasis (~80%)malignancy (~20%)sclerosing cholangitisbiliary tree procedures, e.g. ERCPAcute cholangitis is typically a clinical diagnosis with imaging performed to determine if there is evidence of 1,4:intrahepatic and/or extrahepatic duct dilatation (indicating obstruction/stasis)bile duct wall thickening or focal outpouchingscholelithiasis/choledocholithiasisA hallmark finding of ascending cholangitis on ultrasound is thickening of the walls of the bile ducts in the appropriate clinical setting.
Ultrasound may also show biliary dilatation with calculi, with or without pus, which appears as debris material within the common bile duct.
In the setting of acute cholangitis, sensitivity to detect choledocholithiasis is reduced 10,11.
Inhomogeneous liver enhancement on arterial-phase CT.
This is a non-specific sign and should be interpreted in the correct clinical context 2,3.Treatment involves appropriate antibiotic therapy and biliary tree decompression (usually either via ERCP or PTC).
Mortality rates are between 50-90% for severe acute cholangitis 5,6.Various factors from literature to suggest poor prognosis 10,12,13,14high fever >39°Cshockorgan dysfunctionadvanced age >75 yearsmental confusionmalignancy as etiologymedical comorbiditieshyperbilirubinemia ≥2.2 mg/dLreduced platelet count <150 × 109/Lhypoalbuminemia <3.0 mg/dLprolonged prothrombin time >1.5 sleukocytosis >20,000/mm3bacteremiaendotoxemiaelevated serum creatinineelevated blood urea nitratedilated bile duct (≥11 mm diameter)bile duct stonesliver abscesseshepatic abscessportal vein thrombosisJean-Martin Charcot (1825-1893) was trained as a pathologist, but he was also a skilled practicing physician, and for many the father of neurology - who also made important contributions to psychiatry.
He also has the distinction of probably having more medical eponyms named for him than any other individual in history 8,9.

Acute cholecystitis refers to the acute inflammation of the gallbladder.
It is the primary complication of cholelithiasis and the most common cause of acute pain in the right upper quadrant (RUQ).Reference articleSummaryRole of imagingRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; read more in our article on acute cholecystitis.epidemiologymost common in those with gallstonesfat, fertile (20-40 years), female patientspresentationconstant right upper quadrant paincolicky pain is more likely to be secondary to biliary colicpain may radiate to shoulder tippathophysiology95% of cases are due to impacted gallstonesinvestigationUS best test to confirm acute cholecystitisCT to assess for complicationstreatmentfast, IV fluids and pain reliefcold cholecystectomy (laparoscopic or open)prognosisprognosis depends on severity and complicationscomplicationsnecrosis and gallbladder gangreneabscess formationperforationfistulaemost common in those with gallstonesfat, fertile (20-40 years), female patientsfat, fertile (20-40 years), female patientsconstant right upper quadrant paincolicky pain is more likely to be secondary to biliary colicpain may radiate to shoulder tipcolicky pain is more likely to be secondary to biliary colic95% of cases are due to impacted gallstonesUS best test to confirm acute cholecystitisCT to assess for complicationsfast, IV fluids and pain reliefcold cholecystectomy (laparoscopic or open)prognosis depends on severity and complicationscomplicationsnecrosis and gallbladder gangreneabscess formationperforationfistulaenecrosis and gallbladder gangreneabscess formationperforationfistulaeconfirm the presence of gallstonesdetermine if there is any evidence of acute gallbladder inflammationlook for evidence of complicationsmost sensitive findingechogenic gallstones and sonographic Murphy signsecondary findingsgallbladder wall thickening (>3 mm)pericholecystic fluidless specific findingsgallbladder distensionsludgeechogenic gallstones and sonographic Murphy signgallbladder wall thickening (>3 mm)pericholecystic fluidgallbladder distensionsludgeCT is much less sensitive than ultrasound in the assessment of cholecystitis.
Gallstones may be very difficult to see at CT.
Findings include:gallbladder distensiongallbladder wall thickeningpericholecystic fluid and inflammatory fat strandingtensile gallbladder fundus signfundus bulging the anterior abdominal wallfundus bulging the anterior abdominal wall

Acute cholecystitis refers to the acute inflammation of the gallbladder.
It is the primary complication of cholelithiasis and the most common cause of acute pain in the right upper quadrant (RUQ).Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresConstant right upper quadrant pain that can radiate to the right shoulder.
Pain typically persists for more than six hours, in contradistinction to the intermittent right upper quadrant pain of biliary colic.
Nausea, vomiting, and fever are also often reported.90-95% of cases are due to gallstones (i.e. acute calculous cholecystitis) with the remainder being acute acalculous cholecystitis.
The development of acute calculous cholecystitis follows a sequence of events:Ultrasound (US) is the preferred initial modality in the investigation of right upper quadrant pain.
It is more sensitive than HIDA scintigraphy 4 and CT in the diagnosis of acute cholecystitis, and more readily available.
The most sensitive US finding in acute cholecystitis is the presence of cholelithiasis in combination with the sonographic Murphy sign.
Both gallbladder wall thickening (>3 mm) and pericholecystic fluid are secondary findings.
Other less specific findings include gallbladder distension and sludge.
Every effort should be made to demonstrate the obstructing stone in the gallbladder neck or cystic duct.
HIDA cholescintigraphy in acute cholecystitis will demonstrate non-visualization of the gallbladder.
Cholescintigraphy is unable to demonstrate many complications of cholecystitis, nor the alternative diagnoses which may be found with ultrasound.
It is therefore reserved for the evaluation of sonographically equivocal cases.
Although traditionally considered less sensitive than ultrasound, some reviews find CT more sensitive for this diagnosis 12,13.
An advantage is that CT also allows better evaluation of other pathologies at the same time.
CT findings include 3:cholelithiasis: gallstones isodense to bile will be missed on CTgallbladder distensiongallbladder wall thickeningmural or mucosal hyperenhancementpericholecystic fluid and inflammatory fat strandingenhancement of the adjacent liver parenchyma due to reactive hyperemiatensile gallbladder fundus sign 7fundus bulging the anterior abdominal wall~75% sensitivity and ~95% specificity for acute cholecystitis in the absence of any other CT featuresuseful sign in making an early diagnosisfundus bulging the anterior abdominal wall~75% sensitivity and ~95% specificity for acute cholecystitis in the absence of any other CT featuresuseful sign in making an early diagnosisDiagnostic criteria on CT as proposed by Mirvis et al.
include 6:major criteriagallstonesthickened gallbladder wallpericholecystic fluid collectionssubserosal edemaminor criteriagallbladder distentionsludgediagnosis of acute cholecystitis can be supported if one major and two minor criteria are present refsgallstonesthickened gallbladder wallpericholecystic fluid collectionssubserosal edemagallbladder distentionsludgeMRI is sensitive in the detection of acute cholecystitis, with findings similar to those seen on ultrasound and CT 3.
MR cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) may show an impacted stone in the gallbladder neck or cystic duct as a rounded filling defect.
Urgent surgical removal of the gallbladder is the treatment of choice for uncomplicated disease.
Gallbladder ischemia with transmural necrosis may occur if the obstruction persists.gangrenous cholecystitis (most common - 20%) 8gallbladder perforation (~5%) 8,9emphysematous cholecystitispericholecystic abscesscholecystoenteric fistulacholecystocutaneous fistula 10vascular complications (gallbladder hemorrhage, portal vein thrombosis, cystic artery pseudoaneurysm) 11The differential diagnosis for acute cholecystitis is extensive and includes:choledocholithiasis pancreatitispeptic ulcer diseaseacute hepatitisliver abscesssub-hepatic appendicitisFor a more extensive differential, please refer to the article on differential diagnosis of diffuse gallbladder wall thickening.cholecystitischronic cholecystitisacute acalculous cholecystitisMirizzi syndromexanthogranulomatous cholecystitis

Acute compartment syndrome is a limb and life-threatening surgical emergency.
It is a painful condition caused by increased intracompartmental pressure, compromising perfusion and resulting in muscle and nerve damage within that compartment.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesAcute compartment syndrome is more common in men under 35 years of age 1.
It is ten times more common in males and most commonly seen following tibial shaft fractures 2.There are five characteristic signs and symptoms for acute compartment syndrome and they generally appear in a stepwise fashion:pain:patients with acute compartment syndrome often report pain in which the severity is out of proportion to the apparent injurythis is an early and common findingoften described as deep and burning in natureparaesthesia: this suggests ischemic nerve injurypallor: this occurs secondary to vascular insufficiency and is uncommonpulselessness: uncommonparalysis: this is rare and often a late findingpatients with acute compartment syndrome often report pain in which the severity is out of proportion to the apparent injurythis is an early and common findingoften described as deep and burning in natureAcute compartment syndrome results primarily from an increase in intracompartmental pressure.
This is often associated with trauma such as fractures or muscle injury.
It occurs when the interstitial pressure within the compartment exceeds the perfusion pressure of the capillary beds.
This results in ischemia and ultimately cellular anoxia leading to damage to nerve and muscle tissues 3.Acute compartment syndrome is diagnosed based on clinical findings and measurement of compartmental pressures.
The utilization of imaging is generally limited 4.Immediate management of suspected acute compartment syndrome involves relieving all external pressures on the compartment (e.g. dressing, splint, or cast) and placing the limb level with the heart.
If conservative management is unsuccessful, emergent fasciotomy is usually required for limb salvage.
Volkmann contractureinfectionlimb amputationrhabdomyolysiscellulitisdeep vein thrombosisnecrotizing fasciitisrhabdomyolysis

Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) is a group of cardiac diagnoses along a spectrum of severity due to the interruption of coronary blood flow to the myocardium, which in decreasing severity are:ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI)non-ST elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)unstable anginaStable angina is not considered an ACS.EpidemiologyPathologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesOf all patients who present to emergency departments with symptoms of ACS, only 20-25% will have ACS confirmed as their discharge diagnosis 1,2.
The most common cause by far is atherosclerotic plaque rupture in coronary artery disease.
Other less common causes include:aortic or coronary artery dissectionvasculitisconnective tissue diseasesdrugs: cocainecoronary artery spasmUnusual variants:Kounis syndrome: allergic / hypersensitivity precipitantSeveral other pathological entities may mimic an acute coronary syndrome in both electrocardiographic appearance and clinical presentation;the differential diagnosis for ST segment elevation on the ECG includes 5:myocarditis and/or pericarditisleft ventricular hypertrophyleft ventricular aneurysmTako-tsubo cardiomyopathyelectrolyte abnormalitiesincluding hyperkalemia and hypercalcemiaacute pulmonary embolismcoronary artery vasospasmacute CNS pathologyincluding subarachnoid hemorrhage and intracranial hemorrhagebenign early repolarizationelevated intraabdominal/intrathoracic pressurecritically ill patients with free fluid and/or air in their thorax/abdominal cavity may, rarely, present with bizarre ECG patterns, including ST segment elevationsthe "spiked helmet sign" refers to the characteristic appearance of the sharp upstroke of the baseline leading into ST elevation 3most commonly noted to occur in massive gastric dilatation, small bowel obstruction, and pneumothorax 4myocarditis and/or pericarditisleft ventricular hypertrophyleft ventricular aneurysmTako-tsubo cardiomyopathyelectrolyte abnormalitiesincluding hyperkalemia and hypercalcemiaacute pulmonary embolismcoronary artery vasospasmacute CNS pathologyincluding subarachnoid hemorrhage and intracranial hemorrhagebenign early repolarizationelevated intraabdominal/intrathoracic pressurecritically ill patients with free fluid and/or air in their thorax/abdominal cavity may, rarely, present with bizarre ECG patterns, including ST segment elevationsthe "spiked helmet sign" refers to the characteristic appearance of the sharp upstroke of the baseline leading into ST elevation 3most commonly noted to occur in massive gastric dilatation, small bowel obstruction, and pneumothorax 4including hyperkalemia and hypercalcemiaincluding subarachnoid hemorrhage and intracranial hemorrhagecritically ill patients with free fluid and/or air in their thorax/abdominal cavity may, rarely, present with bizarre ECG patterns, including ST segment elevationsthe "spiked helmet sign" refers to the characteristic appearance of the sharp upstroke of the baseline leading into ST elevation 3most commonly noted to occur in massive gastric dilatation, small bowel obstruction, and pneumothorax 4the "spiked helmet sign" refers to the characteristic appearance of the sharp upstroke of the baseline leading into ST elevation 3most commonly noted to occur in massive gastric dilatation, small bowel obstruction, and pneumothorax 4Other serious causes of acute chest pain which may mimic the presentation of ACS include;thoracic aortic dissectionesophageal rupturepulmonary embolismpneumothoraxcardiac tamponade

Acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), as the name would suggest, is featured by a monophasic acute inflammation and demyelination of white matter typically following a recent (1-2 weeks prior) viral infection or vaccination 4,6.
Grey matter, especially that of the basal ganglia, is also often involved, albeit to a lesser extent, as is the spinal cord.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisTypically, ADEM presents in children or adolescents (usually younger than 15 years of age).
However, cases have been reported in all ages 12.
Winter and spring seasonal peaks in the presentation have been observed in some studies, supporting the infectious etiology hypothesis 9.Less than 5% of all ADEM cases follow an immunisation 8.Unlike many other demyelinating diseases (e.g. multiple sclerosis or neuromyelitis optica), ADEM has no female predilection; if anything, there is slight male predominance 12.
ADEM is usually a monophasic illness, although, within the episode, individual lesions may be of varying stages of evolution, with different lesions maturing over a number of weeks 4.
In 10% of cases, relapse within the first three months is encountered 12.
Unlike multiple sclerosis, symptoms are more systemic rather than focal and include fever, headache, decreased level of consciousness varying from lethargy to coma, seizure, and multifocal neurologic symptoms such as hemiparesis, cranial nerve palsies, and movement disorders; behavioral changes like depression, delusions, and psychosis may dominate the symptoms 3.ADEM is thought to occur from a cross-reactivity in immunity to viral antigens, triggering a subsequent autoimmune attack on the CNS.
In approximately half of confirmed cases, anti-MOG (myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein) immunoglobulin G antibodies can be identified 12.
The pathological hallmark is perivenular inflammation with limited ‘‘sleeves of demyelination", which is also a feature of multiple sclerosis.
However, multiple sclerosis typically presents confluent sheets of macrophage infiltration mixed with reactive astrocytes in completely demyelinated regions 9.cerebrospinal fluid pleocytosis 12cerebrospinal fluid may show an increase in myelin basic proteinanti-MOG antibodies 12Appearances vary from small punctate lesions to tumefactive regions, which have less mass effect than one would expect for their size, distributed in the supratentorial or infratentorial white matter.
Compared to multiple sclerosis, involvement of the callososeptal interface is unusual.
Lesions are usually bilateral but asymmetrical.
Involvement of cerebral cortex, subcortical grey matter - especially the thalami - and the brainstem is not very common, but if present are helpful in distinguishing from multiple sclerosis 4,12.In addition to lesions involving grey matter, antibodies to basal ganglia can also develop, especially in the setting of post-streptococcal pharyngitis, resulting in more diffuse involvement 11,12.
The spinal cord may show confluent intramedullary lesions with variable enhancement, but these are only seen in approximately one-third of cases 12.
Despite the clinical and radiological differences mentioned above, it is frequently difficult to differentiate between ADEM and MS at first presentation.
The most accepted criteria for differentiation in children are the Callen MS-ADEM criteria 13,14.The lesions are usually indistinct regions of low density within the white matter and may demonstrate ring enhancement.
MRI is far more sensitive than CT and demonstrates lesions characteristic of demyelination: T2: regions of high signal, with surrounding edema typically situated in subcortical locations; the thalami and brainstem can also be involvedT1 C+ (Gd): punctate, ring or arc enhancement (open ring sign) is often demonstrated along the leading edge of inflammation; absence of enhancement does not exclude the diagnosisDWI: there can be peripherally restricted diffusion; the center of the lesion, although high on T2 and low on T1, does not have increased restriction on DWI (cf.
cerebral abscess), nor does it demonstrate absent signal on DWI as one would expect from a cyst; this is due to increase in extracellular water in the region of demyelinationMagnetization transfer may help distinguish ADEM from multiple sclerosis, in that normal-appearing brain (on T2-weighted images) has normal magnetization transfer ratio and normal diffusivity, whereas in multiple sclerosis both measurements are significantly decreased 3.Treatment typically consists of methylprednisolone, with immunoglobulin and cyclophosphamide reserved for patients refractory to steroids 4.Complete recovery within one month is the most common outcome (50-60%), with sequelae (most commonly seizures) seen in a significant proportion of cases (20-30%).
In a small proportion (reported figures range from 10 to 20% 12) the course is more fulminant, frequently resulting in death.
In such cases, the lesion may demonstrate hemorrhage and the condition is then known as acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (Hurst disease) 12.Relapsing forms of ADEM are certainly described (relapsing disseminated encephalomyelitis (RDEM) and multiphasic disseminated encephalomyelitis (MDEM)), although the demarcation between these and relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis is contentious.
When the diagnosis of ADEM is made, progression to multiple sclerosis is not uncommon, reported in up to 35% of cases 4.
As fever and infection are well-known triggers for multiple sclerosis, it is perhaps not surprising that a history of recent infection is identified in clinically isolated syndrome (CIS).General imaging differential considerations include:Susac syndromeacute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood (ANEC) 7multiple sclerosisMarburg variantBalo concentric sclerosisSchilders variantacute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (Hurst disease)Marburg variantBalo concentric sclerosisSchilders variant

Acute eosinophilic pneumonia is a type of eosinophilic lung disease diagnosed when the following combination of clinical and radiographic findings occur 5,7:febrile illness of less than five days' durationhypoxemiadiffuse alveolar or mixed alveolar-interstitial opacities on chest radiographybronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) fluid consisting of >25% eosinophilsabsence of parasitic, fungal, or other infectionprompt and complete response to corticosteroidsno relapse after discontinuation of corticosteroidsMost cases are idiopathic, however, a link to new or binge smoking in a subset of patients has been suggested 8.
Peripheral blood eosinophil counts are usually normal, although they can become elevated during the subsequent clinical course.
A very high eosinophil count in bronchoalveolar lavage is characteristic of the condition.
Imaging features should be interpreted in the correct clinical context.
Described features include 4,6,9:bilateral ground-glass areas: common  interlobular septal thickening: commonpleural effusions: can be present in ~80% (range 60-100%) of casesthickening of bronchovascular bundles: present in around two-thirds of casesair-space consolidation: present in around half of the casesill-defined centrilobular nodules: present in around one-third of casesZonal distribution:central-to-peripheral zonal distribution 6random ~60%peripheral ~30%central ~10%apicobasal overall zonal distribution 6random ~65% lower lobes ~30% upper lobes ~15% random ~60%peripheral ~30%central ~10%random ~65% lower lobes ~30% upper lobes ~15%

Acute exacerbation of interstitial lung disease (AE-ILD) which sometimes also encompasses acute exacerbation of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (AE-IPF) is a situation as an acute, clinically significant deterioration which develops within less than 1 month without an obvious clinical precipitant such as fluid overload, infection, left heart failure, or pulmonary embolism 2,7.
At the time of initial writing (2018) the majority of data regarding AE-ILD comes from the idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) population and is extrapolated to other forms of ILD.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesThe annual incidence of AE-IPF has been reported at around 5-15% on one publication 6, and is considered is less common in mild disease.
Alveolar damage is considered the predominant feature of AE-IPF which manifests histopathologically as diffuse alveolar damage.
May manifest as rather diffuse, bilateral ground-glass opacification on a background of more established preexisting areas of pulmonary fibrosis.
It is often associated with a poor prognosis and high mortality 3.
Empirical high-dose corticosteroid steroid therapy has been used but without proven benefit 5.interstitial lung diseaseacute interstitial pneumonia

Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) is a rare pregnancy-associated condition that tends to manifest in the 3rd trimester of pregnancy or early postpartum period.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyDiagnostic criteriaRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesThe estimated incidence is at around 1:7000-20,000 births.
Patients may present with nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant pain, and/or jaundice.
The pathogenesis may be related to an abnormality in fetal fatty acid metabolism.pre-eclampsiaAccording to the Swansea criteria for the diagnosis of acute fatty liver of pregnancy, six or more of the following findings are required in the absence of another cause 10:vomitingabdominal painpolydipsia/polyuriaencephalopathyelevated bilirubin > 14 µmol/lhypoglycemia < 4 mmol/lelevated urea > 340 µmol/lleukocytosis > 11 x 10⁹ /lascites or bright liver on ultrasound scanelevated transaminases (AAT or ALT) > 42 IU/lelevated ammonia > 47 µmol/lrenal impairment: creatinine > 150 µmol/lcoagulopathy: prothrombin time > 14 seconds or APPT > 34 secondsmicrovesicular steatosis on liver biopsyImaging features are often that of fatty infiltration of the liver.
Non-specific findings are usual and the liver can even be normal in echotexture 2.
However, in the context of biliary type symptoms, ultrasound may be useful to rule out other causes of obstructive biliary tract pathology.
May show evidence of low attenuation 3-4 which is again non-specific.mortality is ~20%, with the cause of death usually due to sepsis, renal failure, circulatory collapse, pancreatitis or gastrointestinal bleedingliver function tests may show a continued deterioration for up to one week postpartum in the surviving patients and then the values slowly recoverFat accumulation, along with ammonia production by hepatocytes, can lead to:coagulopathy (e.g. disseminated intravascular coagulation)hypoglycemia secondary to evolving hepatic failureIt was first described by HL Sheehan et al.
in 1940 6.Considerations include:HELLP syndromeintrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancyhepatitisviral hepatitisautoimmune hepatitisviral hepatitisautoimmune hepatitis

Acute gastritis is a broad term that encompasses a myriad of causes of gastric mucosal inflammation.
Epidemiology Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic features ReferencesCases and figuresDepends on the etiology (see below).asymptomaticepigastric pain/tendernessnausea and vomitingloss of appetiteinfection: H. pylori (most common)systemic illness: trauma and burnspharmacological/medication: NSAIDsautoimmunecaustic ingestionacid/alkali ingestionimmunosuppression/AIDS-related cytomegalovirusCandida albicanshistoplasmosiscryptosporidiosistoxoplasmosiseosinophilic gastritiscytomegalovirusCandida albicanshistoplasmosiscryptosporidiosistoxoplasmosisCT findings can suggest gastritis and detect complications such as gastric perforation, however, often gastritis and tumors cannot be easily differentiated on CT.
Moreover, causes of gastritis cannot be determined on CT.
Both circumstances require clinical/lab correlation, probable endoscopy examination and tissue biopsy 1,2.CT findings suggestive of gastritis include:gastric wall edema: measuring the HU may be useful to differentiate edema from low attenuation neoplastic lesionhalo sign: mucosal enhancement surrounded by submucosal and gastric wall edema

Acute hemorrhagic encephalomyelitis (AHEM), also known as acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis (AHLE), Hurst disease or Weston Hurst syndrome, is a very rare form of demyelinating disease.
It occurs sporadically and may be considered as the most severe form of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) and is characterized by an acute rapidly progressive fulminant inflammation of the white matter.
The cause is unclear but may be post-infectious (either viral or bacterial).EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAHEM may more commonly occur in young adults, contrary to ADEM, which is more commonly diagnosed in children 5.
It has been reported in older adults 6.
There is no gender predilection.
Patients present with fever, neck stiffness, fatigue, headache, nausea and vomiting, seizures and coma.
A history of upper respiratory infection prior to presenting neurologic symptoms (interval 2 to 12 days) may be present in ~50% of cases 4.AHEM is related to autoimmune cross reaction to the myelin antigens, and is defined by the presence of necrotizing venulitis with perivascular hemorrhages, diffuse CNS ischemic lesions and myelin destruction 4.
Many authors consider it a fulminant variant of ADEM, forming a spectrum of disease 4,5.marked cerebral edema and congestion, often with herniationpunctate hemorrhages within the cerebral white matter, not infrequently necroticnot uncommonly presence of necrosis in basal gangliatypically no involvement of the spinal cordImaging appearances are dominated by fibrinoid venous necrosis, leading to acute hemorrhage with fibrin exudates and neutrophilic debris:classically hemorrhages around the necrotic venules resembling “ring and ball”white matter ischemic changes adjacent to necrotic postcapillary venuleshemorrhage more prominent than demyelinationno specific immunohistochemical pattern 4This is the gold-standard and may depict aforementioned morphologic changes such as:large tumefactive lesions involving the white matter and sparing the cortexassociated punctate hemorrhages and extensive mass effect and surrounding edema.possible involvement of ganglia and thalamiDetection of cerebral microhemorrhages by GRE or the more sensitive susceptibility weighted images (SWI) is an important finding and may allow for differentiation from ADEM.Acute hemorrhagic leukoencephalitis is associated with a very poor prognosis with the majority of affected individuals succumbing to the disease.
It was first described by Edward Weston Hurst (1900-1980), a British neurologist, in 1941 2.General imaging differential considerations include:acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM): probably the milder form of the same diseasesevere demyelination / multiple sclerosistumefactive demyelinating lesions (TDL)acute malignant Marburg type multiple sclerosisherpes simplex encephalitiscerebral vasculitistumefactive demyelinating lesions (TDL)acute malignant Marburg type multiple sclerosis

Acute hepatitis (plural: acute hepatitides) occurs when the liver suffers an injury with a resulting inflammatory reaction.
The cause of the injury can happen in multiple different ways, and imaging findings are often non-specific.
Acute hepatitis is a clinical diagnosis and a normal imaging appearance of the liver does not exclude it 7.EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe incidence of acute hepatitis depends on the etiology.
Patients often present with fever, abdominal pain, and jaundice.
Multiple serum lab values are often elevated, including AST, ALT, and GGT.
Depending on the degree of liver injury, lab values may indicate depressed liver function (e.g. decreased albumin).
If the hepatitis is a result of viral infection, specific serum immunologic markers may be present (e.g. anti-HAV IgM indicates active hepatitis A infection).Acute hepatitis is a general term encompassing diffuse hepatocyte injury with resulting inflammatory change.
The entire liver may be involved or only portions of it.
Etiologies may include:viral hepatitides: (e.g. HAV, HCV, HBV, etc.)acute viral hepatitis is distinguished from chronic viral hepatitis, by the duration of hepatitis and by differing histopathological injury patternsparasitesdrug/toxin-induced hepatitis (e.g. acetaminophen toxicity, alcohol)autoimmune hepatitissteatohepatitismetabolic diseaseacute viral hepatitis is distinguished from chronic viral hepatitis, by the duration of hepatitis and by differing histopathological injury patternsDescribed features include:hepatomegaly (most sensitive sign)>15.5 cm at the midclavicular line 4starry sky appearance has been found to have poor sensitivity and specificity 2gallbladder wall thickeningvariably presentmay be more closely associated with hepatitis Aperiportal edemaaccentuated brightness of portal vein radicle wallscolor/spectral Doppler: normalthe overall echotexture is often decreased 5,6>15.5 cm at the midclavicular line 4variably presentmay be more closely associated with hepatitis ANot a first line imaging modality for evaluation.
Findings include:hepatomegaly>15.5 cm at the midclavicular line 4possible decreased attenuation around the portal system and at the hepatic hilum (periportal edema)possible diffusely decreased parenchymal attenuation on noncontrast CTdiffuse edematous changehepatic steatosis may be a cause (steatohepatitis) or a result of acute hepatitispossible periportal/hepatoduodenal lymphadenopathy>15.5 cm at the midclavicular line 4diffuse edematous changehepatic steatosis may be a cause (steatohepatitis) or a result of acute hepatitisFindings on MRI are non-specific, and MRI is often used to exclude other etiologies of deranged serum liver function tests:T2:increased T2 signal around the portal system (periportal edema)possible mild generalized increase in parenchymal signal intensityT1 C+ (Gd):delayed, gradual periportal enhancementIP/OOP:hepatic steatosis may be apparentincreased T2 signal around the portal system (periportal edema)possible mild generalized increase in parenchymal signal intensitydelayed, gradual periportal enhancementhepatic steatosis may be apparentAutoimmune hepatitis does not usually present with lymphadenopathy.
Treatment depends on the etiology of the acute hepatitis.

Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis (a.k.a.
acute extrinsic allergic alveolitis) refers to the episodic form of this condition usually happening in just a few hours after the antigen exposure and often recurring with the re-exposure.
It represents the most inflammatory side of the spectrum of hypersensitivity pneumonitis and has the potential to resolve with treatment.
For a general discussion of the condition, refer to the parent article on hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresFever, chills, myalgia, headaches, coughing, chest tightness, dyspnea, and leukocytosis can occur in various combinations and typically occurs 4-12 hours after exposure 1-3.
The symptoms may begin after patients return to an environment from which they have been absent for a while (e.g. resuming work following weekends or holidays) but in at times do not develop with uninterrupted, routine contact with the same antigen.
Acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis is histologically characterized by the presence of neutrophilic infiltration of the respiratory bronchioles and alveoli.
A pattern of diffuse alveolar damage and temporally uniform, non-specific, chronic interstitial pneumonitis may also be seen.
Chest radiographs are often normal in patients with mild symptoms and can remain normal despite severe symptoms 3.
When abnormal, it may present with:bilateral areas of increased opacities that may be either heterogeneous or homogeneous and can simulate pulmonary edema 2,3numerous poorly defined small (<5 mm) opacities throughout both lungs, sometimes with sparing of the apices and basesa pattern of fine reticulation may also occurzonal distribution is variable from patient to patient and may even show temporal variation within the same patientThe acute phase is dominated by air space abnormality (alveolitis) with no features of fibrosis.
Findings include:homogeneous groundglass opacities that are usually bilateral and symmetric, but sometimes patchy and concentrated in the middle part and base of the lungs or in a bronchovascular distributionnumerous "soft" centrilobular opacities: usually <5 mm in diameter (occasionally these opacities have well-defined borders and soft-tissue attenuation)hypoattenuation and hypovascularity of scattered secondary lobules: hypoattenuating regions that persist on expiratory CT scans are indicative of air trapping, which is caused by bronchiolar inflammation and obstruction: this may give a mosaic attenuation pattern there may be a lower zonal predilection in the acute formOn plain radiograph and CT, acute hypersensitivity pneumonitis can mimic pulmonary infection or pulmonary edema  5.

Acute idiopathic scrotal edema (AISE) is a self-limiting condition characterized by marked edema of the skin and dartos fascia without involvement of the deeper layers, testes, or epididymis.
It is an important condition to recognize in order to avoid unnecessary surgical exploration.
Epidemiology Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresWhile it can occur in both children and adults, it mostly occurs in children <10 years of age 3.
Swelling and erythema in the scrotal wall are characteristic, but the condition is not universally painful.
AISE can be unilateral or bilateral (approximately 90% of cases are unilateral 3) and extension of erythema to the perineum or inguinal region is seen in half of cases.
The exact etiology of AISE is unclear.
It has been hypothesized that it represents a hypersensitivity reaction related to a variant of angioneurotic edema.
It has been associated with eosinophilia, with a 66.7% incidence in one case series.
Ultrasound is the imaging modality of choice in the investigation of the acute scrotum.
Thickening and edema of the scrotal wall, hypervascularity of the scrotum, and normal appearance of the testes are considered specific for the condition.
Geiger et al.
have described the “fountain sign,” a novel finding on color Doppler interrogation which is highly suggestive of the diagnosis 7.
The “fountain” depicted on transverse imaging of the scrotum is due to marked increased hypervascularity in the scrotal wall which derives its blood supply from branches of the deep external pudendal and internal pudendal arteries via the anterior and posterior sacral arteries.
Other sonographic findings described in AISE include mild reactive hydrocele and enlarged, hypervascular inguinal lymph nodes.
AISE is a self-limiting condition, which tends to resolve in around 3-5 days.
NSAIDs and antibiotics have been used in management.
A correct diagnosis can obviate surgical intervention and the characteristic ultrasound findings can be particularly helpful given the overlap in clinical presentation with testicular torsion and other conditions.
The use of Doppler ultrasound was shown to reduce the rate of surgical exploration by more than half in one study.
Acute idiopathic scrotal edema was first reported as a cause of the acute scrotum by Qvist in 1959.The clinical differential diagnosis for AISE includes other causes of acute scrotum such as:cellulitisepididymitistesticular torsionHenoch-Schönlein purpura (in the setting of a pediatric patient with joint pain and rash) 8torsion of the testicular and epididymal appendages Lymphatic malformations of the scrotum can also present with bilateral scrotal pain and hydrocele.

Acute interstitial pneumonitis (AIP), also known as Hamman-Rich syndrome is a rapidly progressive non-infectious interstitial lung disease of unknown etiology.
It is considered the only acute process among the idiopathic interstitial pneumonias.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresTruly idiopathic AIP tends to occur in those without pre-existing lung disease and typically affects middle-aged adults (mean ~ 50 years 5).
However, in certain conditions such as leflunomide-induced acute interstitial pneumonia, patients have pre-existing lung disease.
Clinical features are varied.
Patients often have a history of an antecedent illness such as a viral upper respiratory infection.
Common initial symptoms include myalgia, arthralgia, pyrexia, chills, and malaise.
Severe exertional dyspnea develops over a matter of days to weeks 13.AIP is characterized histologically by diffuse alveolar damage (DAD) 2.
The alveolar damage comprises three phases:an acute exudative phasea subsequent organizing phasea final fibrotic phaseHistological features are very similar to those of adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).The clinical context is vital for correct image interpretation.
Nonspecific and often shows bilateral patchy airspace opacification.
During the initial stages, AIP can have features similar to adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), which include:areas with ground-glass attenuation: generally tend to be bilateral and symmetrical 10traction bronchiectasis: can be seen in ~80% of cases during the course of the disease 4 and correlates with disease duration 2parenchymal architectural distortion of the lungair space consolidation: may have a slight predilection towards the dependent portions 5The condition usually progresses to respiratory failure that requires mechanical ventilation and corticosteroid therapy.
Even despite mechanical ventilation, it often carries a grave prognosis with > 70% mortality at ~ 3 months 1.clinical features first described by L Hamman and A Rich in 1935 8pathological processes first described by A L Katzenstein et al.
in 1986 3Considerations in early stages include:adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS): can involve other organs 9infectious multifocal pneumoniaatypical: e.g. mycoplasma pneumoniabacterial pneumoniasevere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)atypical: e.g. mycoplasma pneumoniabacterial pneumoniasevere acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)Other considerations include:an acute interstitial pneumonitis process triggered by certain medications, e.g. leflunomide-induced acute interstitial pneumonia For a more general differential, consider:differential diagnosis of diffuse air space consolidationdifferential diagnosis of ground-glass opacification

Acute invasive fungal sinusitis is the most aggressive form of fungal sinusitis.
It is seen particularly in immunocompromised patients and is the source of significant morbidity and mortality.
It should be distinguished from the other two forms of invasive fungal sinusitis, chronic invasive fungal sinusitis, and chronic granulomatous invasive sinusitis, which are discussed separately.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAcute invasive fungal sinusitis is seen in immunocompromised patients, hence the demographics will match those of the underlying immunosuppressing condition.
Common causes of underlying immunosuppression include 1-3: diabetes mellitus: especially those with ketoacidosisneutropeniahematologic malignanciessolid organ transplantsbone marrow transplantationchemotherapy-induced neutropeniaadvanced AIDShematologic malignanciessolid organ transplantsbone marrow transplantationchemotherapy-induced neutropeniaClinical presentation is variable but often dramatic, with rapid development of fever, facial pain, nasal congestion, epistaxis and sensation loss in the malar areas.
Extension into the orbit, cavernous sinus, or intracranial compartment is frequent, resulting in deterioration in vision, proptosis, and neurological deficits, respectively 1-2.The disease progresses over a few days or at most a few weeks and often results in vascular invasion and systemic dissemination 2,5.Infection is believed to originate in the nasal cavity (most often the middle turbinate) with subsequent spread to the paranasal sinuses 3.
Several fungal agents are implicated, including 1-2:Aspergillus spp: typically in neutropenic patientsZygomycetes: usually in diabetic patientsRhizopus sppMucor sppRhizomucor sppAbsidia sppRhizopus sppMucor sppRhizomucor sppAbsidia sppThe infection can spread rapidly from the sinuses via vascular invasion and bony erosion, potentially leading to extension to the orbit, brain, cavernous sinus or carotid arteries 6.
Unlike chronic invasive fungal sinusitis, acute infection generally does not demonstrate hyperdense material within the sinus on non-contrast CT.
CT is particularly effective at assessing bony changes.
Findings include 2:mucosal thickening: hypoattenuatingopacification of the sinus: soft tissue attenuationbone destruction: may be extensive or very subtle or even inapparent (extension through intact bone via vascular invasion)nasal septal ulcerationfat stranding outside the sinus perimeterintraorbital fatperiantral fatnasolacrimal ductlacrimal sacmasticator spacepterygopalatine fossaintraorbital fatperiantral fatnasolacrimal ductlacrimal sacmasticator spacepterygopalatine fossaImaging findings may be mild, particularly in the early phases of the disease.
The degree of sinonasal mucosal thickening may be mild and is not sensitive or specific for diagnosis of the disease.
Presence of any one of the above findings should raise suspicious of invasive fungal sinusitis in high risk patients 6.
Mild periantral fat stranding is often the first sign of vascular invasion and spread beyond the paranasal sinuses.
Features of potential complications should also be sought (see below).MRI is the modality of choice to assess soft tissue extension.
The findings within the sinus itself are variable, and range from mucosal thickening, to complete opacification of the sinus.
T1: intermediate low signalT2fungal mass is of intermediate to low signaloften associated with fluid or blood elsewhere in the paranasal sinusesT1 C+ (Gd): absent sinus mucosal enhancement suggests necrosis; invasion outside the sinus appears as increased enhancementfungal mass is of intermediate to low signaloften associated with fluid or blood elsewhere in the paranasal sinusesParticular attention should be paid to the assessment of invasion beyond the sinuses.
In some cases, a complication may be obvious (see below).
The early invasion should be sought, and findings that are particularly important include 2: stranding of the periantral fat (T1 and STIR/T2 fat-sat)intraorbital fatmasticator spacepterygopalatine fossasubtle enhancement (T1 C+ fat-sat)leptomeningeal enhancementintracranial granulomas: low signal on both T1 and T2cavernous sinus thrombosis carotid pseudoaneurysm cerebritisbrain abscess intraorbital fatmasticator spacepterygopalatine fossaThe key to successful management is early and aggressive medical and surgical treatment and correction of neutropenia.
Systemic antifungal (e.g. amphotericin B) should be administered and diabetic ketoacidosis or neutropenia should be corrected.
Aggressive surgical débridement is usually required.
Complications include 2:intraorbital extensionintracranial extensionleptomeningeal enhancementintracranial granulomasepidural abscess and empyemavascular invasioncavernous or dural venous sinus thrombosismycotic aneurysm formationcerebral infarction or hemorrhagesystemic disseminationleptomeningeal enhancementintracranial granulomasepidural abscess and empyemacavernous or dural venous sinus thrombosismycotic aneurysm formationcerebral infarction or hemorrhagesystemic disseminationDespite modern management, mortality remains high (50-80%), especially in patients whose neutropenia cannot be corrected, and in general is higher in diabetic patients (often due to later presentation) 2-4.
Reduced mortality, down to as low as 18%, has been reported in at-risk patients under close active surveillance 4.chronic invasive fungal sinusitislonger clinical history (usually more than 12 weeks) 5hyperdense material within the sinus is more commonsclerotic changes to the bony walls of the affected sinuses representing chronicity of the diseasecomplicated acute sinusitisPott puffy tumor sinonasal carcinomasinonasal non-Hodgkin lymphomamucocelelonger clinical history (usually more than 12 weeks) 5hyperdense material within the sinus is more commonsclerotic changes to the bony walls of the affected sinuses representing chronicity of the diseasePott puffy tumor

Acute lung transplant rejection is one of the early post lung transplant complications.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesIt can occur as several episodes and the first episode may occur early as 5 days after transplantation.
The incidence is thought to peak at approximately 2 months post-transplantation (with several episodes occurring) 3.
After 6 months, acute rejection is an uncommon event.
Histologically, it is defined as perivascular or peribronchiolar mononuclear inflammation and may affect up to 55% of lung transplant recipients within the first year after a transplant 2.
While no single individual CT finding can be specific to the diagnosis 4,8, CT may show:ground-glass opacities: considered the most frequent finding 7 and, when absent, it almost excludes acute rejection 8consolidationinterlobular septal thickeningpleural effusionnodular opacities 6mild volume loss in the graftRadiographic features may show a dramatic response to steroid therapy 5,8.Acute lung rejection can be further complicated by the subsequent development of bronchiolitis obliterans syndrome (BOS) which is a condition of progressive airflow obstruction that limits survival to only 50% at 5 years post-transplantation 2.Radiographic appearances can mimic 6:reimplantation response: pulmonary edema following lung transplantation pulmonary infectionespecially when consolidative changes are present especially when consolidative changes are present

Acute liver failure (ALF), also known as fulminant hepatic failure, refers to sudden severe liver dysfunction from injury without underlying chronic liver disease (CLD), although sometimes it presents as decompensation of an unknown chronic liver disease.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAcute liver failure is rare, with <1 case per 100,000 in the developed world 5.Symptoms and signs of hepatic encephalopathy and/or coagulopathy is the most common presentation.
There are many causes for acute liver failure 1,3,4:viral infection, hepatitis B is probably the most common 5,6idiopathic (15%), i.e. cause unknowndrug toxicity, e.g. acetaminophen toxicity, chemotherapeutic agentstoxin exposure, e.g. toxic mushrooms, carbon tetrachloride (industrial chemical), aflatoxin 7metabolic disease, e.g. Wilson disease, Reye disease, acute fatty liver of pregnancy, HELLP syndromevascular causes, e.g. Budd-Chiari syndrome, right heart failure, shockautoimmune hepatitisGeneral features may include: hepatomegalygallbladder wall thickeningascites (may be small volume 3)Features of cirrhosis (i.e. splenomegaly, enlarged collateral vessels, liver surface nodularity) are present in 20-30% of patients with acute liver failure (ALF), although it should be stressed that patients with ALF do not have cirrhosis 3.early: decreased liver echogenicity (cf.
right kidney)late: the liver becomes heterogeneously echogenic 1CT may demonstrate the general imaging features along with heterogeneous enhancement on portal venous phase imaging 3.
Mortality is high in acute liver failure at ~50% (range 30-70%) with orthotopic liver transplant considered the definitive treatment 3,4.
The goals of management include identification of reversible causes of acute liver failure, provide organ support to maximize the probability of recovery as well as to perform risk stratification and identify patients for consideration of early liver transplantation, as they may not survive supportive care 8.
Consideration for transfer to a center with expertise in liver transplantation may be appropriate 8.

Acute lupus pneumonitis is one of the presentations of thoracic manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesAcute lupus pneumonitis presents with acute onset of fever, cough, tachypnea, and hypoxia.
Appearances are non-specific.
Usual radiological signs include acute consolidation in one or more areas (usually basal and bilateral 3).
Pleural effusions are frequently present.
Features of pulmonary arterial hypertension may be present on cross-sectional imaging.systemic lupus erythematosus

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a malignant disorder of the bone marrow characterized by the proliferation of the lymphoid progenitor cells.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresALL is the commonest form of childhood leukemia, accounting for ~80% of pediatric leukemia cases 1.
In adults, ALL corresponds to ~20% of leukemia cases 1.
Peak age is between 3 to 7 years, with a second peak over 40 years.
The clinical features of acute lymphoblastic leukemia are non-specific.
Children commonly have at least one of pallor, fever, a palpable liver, a palpable spleen, or bruising on diagnosis 2.
Other symptoms such as bone or joint pain, weight loss, anorexia, bleeding, abdominal pain and abdominal distension are also common.
In acute lymphoblastic leukemia, the lymphoid progenitor cells, also known as lymphoblasts, do not mature due to abnormal expression of genes, often as a result of chromosomal abnormalities or chromosomal translocations.
The proliferation of the primitive cells takes up more and more marrow space at the expense of the normal hematopoietic elements, resulting in a decrease in the production of normal blood cells and bone marrow failure.
Eventually, the lymphoblasts spill into the blood and can affect the liver, spleen, central nervous system, and lymph nodes.
Bone lesions are common in leukemia.
A metaphyseal radiolucent band is one of the most important radiological finding 3.
Other radiological findings include subperiosteal new bone formation and osteolytic lesions involving the medullary cavity and cortex 1,3-5.Chest radiograph may reveal a mediastinal mass.
The treatment for ALL typically has three phases:induction therapy: combination chemotherapy is used to rapidly kill tumor cells with an aim to get the patient into remissionconsolidation phase: if remission is achieved, further chemotherapy is given during this phase to treat the residual diseasemaintenance phase: if the patient is still in remission after the consolidation phase, maintenance oral therapy is giventhis may last up to three years if the patient remains in remissionthis may last up to three years if the patient remains in remissionPediatric patients with ALL have an overall five-year survival rate of 80% depending on their risk profile 6.
However, only 30-40% of adults with ALL achieve long-term remission with the current treatment regimens 7.For the ALL bony abnormalities, consider: juvenile idiopathic arthritisosteomyelitisaplastic anemiaacute infectious lymphocytosis

Acute mastoiditis refers to a suppurative infection of the mastoid air cells.
It is the most common complication of acute otitis media.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIn acute otitis media, an inflammatory middle ear effusion is present that can freely move into the mastoid air cells.
Consequently, some authors comment that a mild mastoiditis is technically present in nearly all cases of acute otitis media 6.
The mere presence of mastoid fluid on imaging, however, does not change the management of otherwise uncomplicated acute otitis media.
Thus, many clinicians reserve the diagnosis for when there are clinical signs or symptoms of inflammation involving the mastoid.
When mastoiditis and acute otitis media occur concurrently, sometimes the term acute otomastoiditis is used.
When there is clinical evidence of acute mastoiditis, the initial stage is referred to as acute mastoiditis with periostitis, incipient mastoiditis, or mild mastoiditis 6,7.
When mucoperiosteal involvement evolves into resorption of mastoid bony septa, this stage is referred to as coalescent mastoiditis.
Coalescent mastoiditis is a radiological diagnosis.
Acute mastoiditis, like acute otitis media, is largely a disease of childhood.
Acute mastoiditis characteristically presents with postauricular tenderness, erythema, and swelling causing protrusion of the auricle.
Common non-specific findings include otalgia and fever.
Abscess may present with fluctuance or a palpable mass.subperiosteal abscessBezold abscessCitelli abscesslabyrinthitispetrous apicitis: extension of infection into a pneumatized petrous apex; ~30% of the population has pneumatized petrous apex 2intracranial extensionepidural abscess, most commonly perisinus (adjacent to sigmoid sinus)meningitissubdural empyemacerebral abscessdural sinus occlusive disease (DSOD)facial nerve dysfunctionthrombosis of mastoid emissary vein (Griesinger sign)epidural abscess, most commonly perisinus (adjacent to sigmoid sinus)meningitissubdural empyemacerebral abscessdural sinus occlusive disease (DSOD)Acute mastoiditis with periostitis is pathologically characterized by spread of infection through the mastoid emissary veins into the periosteum.
Acute coalescent mastoiditis is characterized by infiltration and destruction of the bone, essentially osteomyelitis.
It is most frequently due to bacterial infections, with Streptococcus pneumoniae and Haemophilus influenzae accounting for 65-80% of cases.
H. influenzae, although less common, is the more aggressive agent, more frequently resulting in complications, especially meningitis.
Streptococcus pneumoniae: most commonHaemophilus influenzae: common and more aggressive than pneumococcusAspergillus: aggressive; seen in older patients; frequently associated with facial nerve dysfunctiontuberculous otomastoiditis: increasing frequency due to greater immunocompromised populationCT is the initial investigation of choice.
Post-contrast imaging is helpful in assessing for associated soft tissue or intracranial complications.
partial-to-complete opacification of the mastoid air cells, which is non-specific but supportive of incipient mastoiditis in the appropriate clinical settingerosion of mastoid air cell bony septa, which establishes the diagnosis of coalescent mastoiditiserosion of the lateral wall of the mastoid, suggestive of subperiosteal abscess, or of the sigmoid plate, suggestive of epidural abscessmass with surrounding fat stranding or rim-enhancing collection deep to the sternocleidomastoid muscle, suggestive of Bezold abscess, or within the digastric triangle, suggestive of Citelli abscesserosion indicating osteomyelitis of the petrous apex (petrous apicitis, petrositis) or occipital bone (confusingly also known as Citelli abscess)cerebral abscessdural venous sinus thrombosispartial-to-complete opacification of the mastoid air cells +/- middle ear cleftfluid signal intensity in the mastoid should not be interpreted as mastoiditis without other evidence, such as mucosal contrast enhancement and/or diffusion restriction 5Typical findings in mastoiditis include 4,5:T1: low signalT2: high signalDWI/ADC: diffusion restriction may be presentT1 C+: mucosal contrast enhancement is present in the majorityUsually, antibiotics are all that is required for treatment.
otomastoiditis

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML), also referred to as acute myelogenous leukemia, is a hematological malignancy characterized by the abnormal clonal proliferation of immature myeloid precursors (myeloblasts) or poorly differentiated cells of the hematopoietic system.
It primary infiltrates the bone marrow, but the disease can also extend to blood and other tissues.
EpidemiologyClinical presentation PathologyTreatment and prognosisReferencesIt is more common in middle-aged and elderly patients, with a median age of diagnosis at 70 years.
The M: F rate varies from 1.1 in the 5th decade to about 1.8 in the 8th decade of life 2,3.
AML only accounts for ~20% of all childhood leukaemias, c.f.
to acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), which represents ~80% of leukaemias at this age group 2.
It has been reported a solid ethnic component in the distribution of most types of AML, with a strong predominance among the white ethnicity group 2,3.
therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia (t-AML)immunosuppression for a solid organ transplantprior radiation therapy or chemotherapy  trisomy 21 8immunosuppression for a solid organ transplantprior radiation therapy or chemotherapy  AML tends to present with vague and nonspecific symptoms such as fatigue and is most commonly revealed on full blood count tests, where anemia, thrombocytopenia, and/or neutropenia are demonstrated 2,4.
Described symptoms associated with bone marrow failure include 4:feversbleeding gumsmultiple ecchymosesdyspnea on exertionanginal chest painrefractory upper respiratory infection symptomsExtramedullary leukemic infiltration can lead to organ-involved symptoms such as hepatosplenomegaly, leukemia cutis, lymphadenopathy, gingival hyperplasia, and neurological symptoms 4.The leukemic myeloblasts can commonly be identified either in peripheral blood smears or bone marrow aspirate.
Eventually, there is infiltration of other organs and tissues:CNS manifestationspulmonary manifestationspulmonary complications tend to be observed more frequently at presentation in neutropenic AML patients of advanced age 7.testicular manifestationspulmonary complications tend to be observed more frequently at presentation in neutropenic AML patients of advanced age 7.The revised 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of tumors of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues classifies AML in multiple subtypes 5.
Depending on the type of cell lineage involved, AML can be divided into specific morphologic subgroups.
The leukemic cells are characterized by very little cytoplasm, which holds fine azurophilic granules and Auer bodies or rods.
Irregular nuclei and distinct nucleoli are also features of those cells 4.AML has an overall poor prognosis compared to the other main types of leukemia, having ~30% 5-year survival rate 8.
This is most evident among elderly patients over 65 years, where up to 70% die within 1 year of diagnosis 8.

Acute necrotic collections (ANCs) are an early, local complication of necrotizing pancreatitis.
TerminologyPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe following are the latest terms according to the updated Atlanta classification to describe fluid collections associated with acute pancreatitis 1,2:fluid collections in interstitial edematous pancreatitisacute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC): in the first 4 weeks: non-encapsulated peripancreatic fluid collectionspseudocysts: develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated peripancreatic or remote fluid collectionsfluid collections in necrotizing pancreatitisacute necrotic collections (ANCs): in the first 4 weeks; non-encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied materialwalled-off necrosis (WON or WOPN): develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied material  acute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC): in the first 4 weeks: non-encapsulated peripancreatic fluid collectionspseudocysts: develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated peripancreatic or remote fluid collectionsacute necrotic collections (ANCs): in the first 4 weeks; non-encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied materialwalled-off necrosis (WON or WOPN): develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied material  Acute necrotic collections develop within the first four weeks and contain a variable amount of fluid/non-liquid necrotic material.
They may be pancreatic or peripancreatic in location and can be sterile or infected.
On contrast-enhanced CT the following features are seen:heterogeneous, non-liquid density collection within the pancreas and/or peripancreatic tissuesno defined capsuleno peripheral enhancementacute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC): within the first week, differentiation between acute necrotic collections (ANC) and APFC may prove impossible

Acute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood (ANEC) is a rare type of encephalopathy characterized by multiple bilateral brain lesions, mainly involving the thalami, but also the putamina, internal and external capsules, cerebellar white matter, and the brainstem tegmentum.
EpidemiologyClinical featuresPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAcute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood is a rare condition with less than 150 cases reported in the literature.
From the first case described in 1995, many cases have been reported in Asia as well as many Western countries.
Most cases are sporadic; however, a few cases of recurrent and/or familial episodes have been reported suggesting an inherited pattern.
Acute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood is seen around the age of 4 years.
Clinically, it is characterized by acute encephalopathy, with dramatic neurological deficits/symptoms.
A viral etiology has been proposed in some cases; viral prodrome hence may precede the neurological deficits.
The etiology and the pathogenesis of acute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood is only partially clear.
Usually, it develops secondary to viral infections, including influenza A and influenza B, parainfluenza, varicella and enterovirus.
Pathologically, the lesions show edema, hemorrhage and necrosis.
ANEC is characterized by the lack of inflammatory cells in affected brain parenchyma in comparison to the more common entities of acute disseminated encephalomyelitis and acute hemorrhagic encephalitis 1.On CT, the corresponding thalamic, putamina, cerebral, cerebellar and brainstem abnormalities are hypodense.
Intracranial hemorrhage and cavitation may also be seen, both of which are associated with a worse prognosis.
In most cases of acute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood, there is bilateral symmetrical thalamic involvement.
Abnormal signals on MRI are hypointense on T1 and hyperintense on T2.
Restricted diffusion of the involved regions can be seen.
7 These findings can be quite extensive.
Hemorrhage, cavitation, and post-contrast enhancement are also seen.
Acute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood carries a very poor prognosis; the mortality rate is near 70%.
Treatment is mainly supportive, as the precise etiology remains unknown.
If characteristic symmetric imaging findings are present, the differential diagnosis is limited.
Lactic acidosis is not a classic finding of ANEC.
Otherwise, the differential diagnoses include:acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM)Leigh syndromeassociated with hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia and lactic acidosisReye syndromeassociated with hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia and lactic acidosisassociated with hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia and lactic acidosisassociated with hypoglycemia, hyperammonemia and lactic acidosisClinically, acute necrotizing encephalitis of childhood may be differentiated from ADEM by an early onset of encephalitic features just after the prodromal illness while in ADEM, they may take 1 to 2 weeks to develop.

Acute otitis externa (AOE), also known as "swimmer's ear", is inflammation of the external auditory canal (EAC) that can involve the pinna as well.
Bacterial infection, most commonly with Pseudomonas aeruginosa, is responsible for the overwhelming majority of cases.
It is a common condition.
EpidemiologyPresentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRead moreReferencesCases and figuresAcute otitis externa has a 1% annual incidence and a 10% lifetime prevalence 1,2.
98% of acute otitis externa is bacterial in origin 3.Acute bacterial otitis externa is common in swimmers; swimming in contaminated lakes and rivers increases the risk of pseudomonal otitis externa.
Progression of acute bacterial otitis externa to necrotizing (a.k.a.
malignant) otitis externa is rare; however, of the patients who develop necrotizing otitis externa, more than 90% are reported to have glucose intolerance.
Patients typically present with pain in the pinna and otorrhea, and there is usually edema of the external auditory canal (EAC), and sometimes erythema and tenderness of the preauricular soft tissues.
An increase in moisture and lack of defensive, acidic cerumen in the external auditory canal causes edema and a favourable environment for bacterial overgrowth.
Trauma to the thin epithelial lining of the canal (with cotton applicators or use of hearing aids) can predispose to infection, facilitating Pseudomonas, and to a lesser degree Staphylococcal, overgrowth 4.Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Staphylococcus aureus are the most common isolates in descending order in bacterial otitis externa.
Bacterial otitis externa may range from a brief inconvenience in immunocompetent individuals to life-threatening in immunosuppressed individuals (see necrotizing otitis externa).Otomycosis is primarily caused by Aspergillus and Candida spp.
It is a common problem in patients with hearing aids or cerumen impaction, which creates a moist environment, facilitating fungal colonization, but can also result from primary antibiotic therapy for bacterial otitis externa.
Pruritus, discharge, and pain are presenting symptoms.
Rarely, a viral etiology such as a varicella-zoster virus infection of the external ear canal is possible manifesting as Ramsay Hunt syndrome.
Imaging is rarely required for acute otitis externa but should be considered in immunocompromised and diabetic patients and when assessing for complications (see necrotizing otitis externa).Topical treatment, sometimes containing antibiotics/antifungals, or corticosteroids to relieve symptoms, or a combination of the above are prescribed.
Aural toileting to remove excess earwax/cerumen can be considered.
Otitis externa

Acute pancreatitis refers to acute inflammation of the pancreas and is a potentially life-threatening condition.
Reference articleSummaryRole of imagingRadiographic featuresRelated articlesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; read more in our article on acute pancreatitis.anatomy pancreasepidemiologyepidemiology is dependent on the cause of pancreatitisgallstones, idiopathic, alcohol, malignancy, metabolic conditionspresentationacute onset, severe central abdominal painradiation through to the backraised lipase and amylasepathophysiologyobstruction of the pancreatic ducts is commonpancreatic enzyme activation results in inflammationinflammation of the pancreas causes in interstitial edema and swellingcontinued inflammation results in necrosis, and in some cases hemorrhageinvestigationnot required for diagnosis, but may helpvery useful for assessment of complicationstreatmentlargely supportive, often requiring ICU care in severe casesrespiratory and cardiovascular supportcareful management of glucose, calcium, and fluid balanceprognosisdependent on the severity of disease and rapidity of treatmentcomplication include necrosis and cyst formationpancreasepidemiology is dependent on the cause of pancreatitisgallstones, idiopathic, alcohol, malignancy, metabolic conditionsgallstones, idiopathic, alcohol, malignancy, metabolic conditionsacute onset, severe central abdominal painradiation through to the backraised lipase and amylaseobstruction of the pancreatic ducts is commonpancreatic enzyme activation results in inflammationinflammation of the pancreas causes in interstitial edema and swellingcontinued inflammation results in necrosis, and in some cases hemorrhagenot required for diagnosis, but may helpvery useful for assessment of complicationslargely supportive, often requiring ICU care in severe casesrespiratory and cardiovascular supportcareful management of glucose, calcium, and fluid balancedependent on the severity of disease and rapidity of treatmentcomplication include necrosis and cyst formationclarify the diagnosis when the clinical picture is confusingassess severity and determine prognosisdetect complicationsdetermine possible causesImaging studies of acute pancreatitis may be normal in mild cases.
Contrast-enhanced CT provides the most comprehensive initial assessment, typically with a dual phase (arterial and portal venous) protocol.
Abnormalities that may be seen in the pancreas include:typical findingsfocal or diffuse parenchymal enlargementchanges in density because of edemaindistinct pancreatic margins owing to inflammationsurrounding retroperitoneal fat strandingnecrosis of pancreatic parenchymalack of parenchymal enhancementinfected necrosisdifficult to distinguish from aseptic liquefactive necrosisthe presence of gas is helpfulabscess formationcircumscribed fluid collectionlittle or no necrotic tissueshemorrhagehigh-attenuation fluid in the retroperitoneum or peripancreatic tissuesfocal or diffuse parenchymal enlargementchanges in density because of edemaindistinct pancreatic margins owing to inflammationsurrounding retroperitoneal fat strandinglack of parenchymal enhancementdifficult to distinguish from aseptic liquefactive necrosisthe presence of gas is helpfulcircumscribed fluid collectionlittle or no necrotic tissueshigh-attenuation fluid in the retroperitoneum or peripancreatic tissues

Acute pancreatitis (plural: pancreatitides) is an acute inflammation of the pancreas and is a potentially life-threatening condition.
The diagnosis of acute pancreatitis is made by fulfilling two of the following three criteria 8:acute onset of persistent, severe epigastric pain (i.e. pain consistent with acute pancreatitis)lipase/amylase elevation >3 times the upper limit of normalcharacteristic imaging features on contrast-enhanced CT, MRI, or ultrasoundImaging is only required to establish the diagnosis if the first two criteria are not met.
Imaging is crucial for the detection of complications and to help guide treatment.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThere are two subtypes of acute pancreatitis as described by the Revised Atlanta Classification 8: interstitial edematous pancreatitisthe vast majority (90-95%)most often referred to simply as "acute pancreatitis" or "uncomplicated pancreatitis"necrotizing pancreatitisnecrosis develops within the pancreas and/or peripancreatic tissuethe vast majority (90-95%)most often referred to simply as "acute pancreatitis" or "uncomplicated pancreatitis"necrosis develops within the pancreas and/or peripancreatic tissueThe demographics of patients affected by acute pancreatitis reflects the underlying cause, of which there are many, including: gallstone passage/impaction: most common cause of acute pancreatitis (up to 15% develop pancreatitis)idiopathic: 20% (range 10%-30%) of cases of acute pancreatitisevidence suggests that most cases are associated with congenital duct abnormalities alcohol abuse: most common cause of chronic pancreatitisnon-linear dose-response relationship 101.2x risk with ~40 g/day alcohol consumption4x risk with ~100 g/day alcohol consumptionmetabolic disordershypertriglyceridemia-induced pancreatitis 131-4% of casesmost common cause in pregnancyhypercalcemiaautoimmune pancreatitispenetrating peptic ulcertrauma: most common cause in childrenblunt abdominal traumasurgeryendoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 7malignancypancreatic adenocarcinomalymphomahereditary pancreatitis (autosomal dominant) SPINK1 gene mutation 5malnutritioninfectionviral: mumps, Coxsackievirus, hepatitis, infectious mononucleosis, HIV/AIDSparasitic: ascariasis 5, clonorchiasisstructural: not a cause, but associated with increased incidencecholedochocelepancreas divisumtoxinsscorpion sting: in particular, the Trinidad thick-tailed scorpion, Tityus trinitatisspider bite (several species)snake bite (adder, cobra) 15drugs: steroids, tetracycline, frusemide, azathioprine, thiazides, L-asparaginase and many othersinterestingly, NSAIDs, while used for symptomatic treatment of pancreatitis, have been implicated as a possible cause, e.g. diclofenac is used in preventing post-ERCP pancreatitis, but is nonetheless considered the major NSAID responsible for inducing acute pancreatitis in the general population 14otherscystic fibrosissystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 4hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)Reye syndrome 6intraluminal duodenal diverticulum 24 evidence suggests that most cases are associated with congenital duct abnormalities non-linear dose-response relationship 101.2x risk with ~40 g/day alcohol consumption4x risk with ~100 g/day alcohol consumption1.2x risk with ~40 g/day alcohol consumption4x risk with ~100 g/day alcohol consumptionhypertriglyceridemia-induced pancreatitis 131-4% of casesmost common cause in pregnancyhypercalcemia1-4% of casesmost common cause in pregnancyblunt abdominal traumasurgeryendoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 7pancreatic adenocarcinomalymphomaviral: mumps, Coxsackievirus, hepatitis, infectious mononucleosis, HIV/AIDSparasitic: ascariasis 5, clonorchiasischoledochocelepancreas divisumscorpion sting: in particular, the Trinidad thick-tailed scorpion, Tityus trinitatisspider bite (several species)snake bite (adder, cobra) 15interestingly, NSAIDs, while used for symptomatic treatment of pancreatitis, have been implicated as a possible cause, e.g. diclofenac is used in preventing post-ERCP pancreatitis, but is nonetheless considered the major NSAID responsible for inducing acute pancreatitis in the general population 14cystic fibrosissystemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 4hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS)Reye syndrome 6intraluminal duodenal diverticulum 24 See: causes of pancreatitis (mnemonic)Classical clinical features include 3:acute onset of severe central epigastric pain (over 30-60 min)poorly localized tenderness and painexacerbated by supine positioningradiates through to the back in 50% of patientsElevation of serum amylase and lipase are 90-95% specific for the diagnosis 3.A normal amylase level (normoamylasaemia) in acute pancreatitis is well-recognized, especially when it occurs on a background of chronic pancreatitis.
A normal lipase level has also been reported (<10 case reports) but is extremely rare 16.(Rare) signs of hemorrhage on the physical exam include:Cullen sign: periumbilical bruisingGrey-Turner sign: flank bruisingThere continues to be debate over the precipitating factor leading to acute pancreatitis, with duct occlusion being an important factor, but neither necessary nor sufficient.
Mechanism notwithstanding, activation of pancreatic enzymes within the pancreas rather than the bowel lead to inflammation of the pancreatic tissue, disruption of small pancreatic ducts and in leakage of pancreatic secretions.
Because the pancreas lacks a capsule, the pancreatic juices have ready access to surrounding tissues.
Pancreatic enzymes digest fascial layers, spreading the inflammatory process to multiple anatomic compartments.pancreatic fluid collections are defined by presence or absence of necrosis (as described by the Revised Atlanta Classification):necrosis absent (i.e. interstitial edematous pancreatitis)acute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFCs) (in the first 4 weeks)pseudocysts: encapsulated fluid collections after 4 weeksnecrosis present (i.e. necrotizing pancreatitis)acute necrotic collections (ANCs): develop in first 4 weekswalled-off necrosis (WON): encapsulated collections after 4 weeksliquefactive necrosis of pancreatic parenchyma (e.g. necrotizing pancreatitis)increased morbidity and mortalitymay become secondarily infected (emphysematous pancreatitis)pancreatic abscessa presence of infection without significant necrosisextremely rareterm not in current use 8vascular complicationshemorrhage: resulting from erosion of blood vessels and tissue necrosispseudoaneurysm: autodigestion of arterial walls by pancreatic enzymes results in pulsatile mass that is lined by fibrous tissue and maintains communication with parent arterysplenic vein thrombosisportal vein thrombosisfistula formation with pancreatic ascites: leakage of pancreatic secretions into the peritoneal cavityabdominal compartment syndromenecrosis absent (i.e. interstitial edematous pancreatitis)acute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFCs) (in the first 4 weeks)pseudocysts: encapsulated fluid collections after 4 weeksnecrosis present (i.e. necrotizing pancreatitis)acute necrotic collections (ANCs): develop in first 4 weekswalled-off necrosis (WON): encapsulated collections after 4 weeksacute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFCs) (in the first 4 weeks)pseudocysts: encapsulated fluid collections after 4 weeksacute necrotic collections (ANCs): develop in first 4 weekswalled-off necrosis (WON): encapsulated collections after 4 weeksincreased morbidity and mortalitymay become secondarily infected (emphysematous pancreatitis)a presence of infection without significant necrosisextremely rareterm not in current use 8hemorrhage: resulting from erosion of blood vessels and tissue necrosispseudoaneurysm: autodigestion of arterial walls by pancreatic enzymes results in pulsatile mass that is lined by fibrous tissue and maintains communication with parent arterysplenic vein thrombosisportal vein thrombosisThe role of imaging is manifold: to clarify the diagnosis when the clinical picture is confusingto assess severity (Balthazar score) and thus to determine prognosisto detect complicationsto determine possible causesImaging studies of acute pancreatitis may be normal in mild cases.
Contrast-enhanced CT provides the most comprehensive initial assessment, typically with a dual-phase (arterial and portal venous) protocol.
However, US is useful for follow-up of specific abnormalities, such as fluid collections and pseudocysts.
Radiographs are insensitive for evidence of acute pancreatitis: many patients have normal exams.
Moreover, none of the signs are specific enough to establish the diagnosis of pancreatitis.
Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate:localized ileus of small intestine (sentinel loop)spasm of the descending colon (colon cut-off sign)Chest radiographs may demonstrate:pleural effusion, usually left-sided 25hemidiaphragm elevationbasal atelectasispulmonary edema suggestive of acute respiratory distress syndromeThe main role of ultrasound is: to identify gallstones as a possible causediagnosis of vascular complications, e.g. thrombosisidentify areas of necrosis which appear as hypoechoic regionsassessment of clinically similar etiologies of an acute abdomenIn the event of a serendipitously patent acoustic window, typical ultrasonographic features congruent with acute pancreatitis include:increased pancreatic volume with a marked decrease in echogenicity 19 volume increase quantified as a pancreatic body exceeding 2.4 cm in diameter, with marked anterior bowing and surface irregularity 17decreased echogenicity secondary to fluid exudation, which may result in a marked heterogeneity of the parenchyma 18displacement of the adjacent transverse colon and/or stomach secondary to pancreatic volume expansion 20volume increase quantified as a pancreatic body exceeding 2.4 cm in diameter, with marked anterior bowing and surface irregularity 17decreased echogenicity secondary to fluid exudation, which may result in a marked heterogeneity of the parenchyma 18Abnormalities that may be seen in the pancreas include:typical findingsfocal or diffuse parenchymal enlargementchanges in density because of edemaindistinct pancreatic margins owing to inflammationsurrounding retroperitoneal fat strandingliquefactive necrosis of pancreatic parenchymalack of parenchymal enhancement (should ideally be 1 week after symptom onset to differentiate from pancreatic hypoenhancement secondary only to edema)often multifocalinfected necrosisdifficult to distinguish from aseptic liquefactive necrosisthe presence of gas is helpful (emphysematous pancreatitis)FNA helpfulabscess formationcircumscribed fluid collectionlittle or no necrotic tissues (thus distinguishing it from infected necrosis)hemorrhagehigh-attenuation fluid in the retroperitoneum or peripancreatic tissuescalcificationevidence of background chronic pancreatitisfocal or diffuse parenchymal enlargementchanges in density because of edemaindistinct pancreatic margins owing to inflammationsurrounding retroperitoneal fat strandinglack of parenchymal enhancement (should ideally be 1 week after symptom onset to differentiate from pancreatic hypoenhancement secondary only to edema)often multifocaldifficult to distinguish from aseptic liquefactive necrosisthe presence of gas is helpful (emphysematous pancreatitis)FNA helpfulcircumscribed fluid collectionlittle or no necrotic tissues (thus distinguishing it from infected necrosis)high-attenuation fluid in the retroperitoneum or peripancreatic tissuesevidence of background chronic pancreatitisDual-energy CT may be able to help better differentiate necrotic debris, hematoma and areas of viable tissue in cases of necrotizing pancreatitis.
In hemorrhagic pancreatitis, virtual non-enhanced images can depict hematoma and differentiate it from parenchymal enhancement on contrast-enhanced images.
It also improves detection of non-calcified gallstones and isoattenuating cholesterol stones which may be the causative factor in the patient's pancreatitis 21.Dual-energy CT dual-phase protocols with a virtual non-enhanced reformat can also offer lower radiation doses than conventional triple-phase CT imaging of the pancreas 21.Contrast-enhanced MR is equivalent to CT in the assessment of pancreatitis.
Treatment is largely supportive, often requiring ICU care in severe cases for respiratory and cardiovascular support and careful management of glucose, calcium, and fluid balance.
Recommendations include 11:aggressive fluid resuscitation in first 24 hoursno need for prophylactic antibioticsenteral feeding strongly preferred over parenteral feeding, especially in severe acute pancreatitisno need for ERCP in acute gallstone pancreatitis unless evidence of ascending cholangitisimage-directed catheter placement is an alternative to surgical drainage of pancreatic fluid collectionscholecystectomy before discharge in patients with acute pancreatitis and gallstones found on imagingPrognosis for acute pancreatitis varies according to severity.
Overall mortality is 5-10% per attack 3.
Various scoring systems exist that attempt to stratify severity (e.g. Ranson's criteria and APACHE II).The 2012 revised Atlanta classification attempts to establish uniformity in reporting for both clinical practice and research 8.General imaging differential considerations include:pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomaautoimmune pancreatitispeptic ulcer disease with posterior perforationpancreatic lymphoma (diffuse pattern)

Acute pelvic pain is a common presenting symptom to the emergency department and radiologist.
Pelvic ultrasound with transabdominal and endovaginal approaches is usually the first line imaging modality.non-cyclic painpain of <3 months durationPatients also often present with nausea, vomiting, and leukocytosis.
The differential can be divided into non-obstetric and obstetric etiologies.
The two are often differentiated by obtaining a preliminary beta-hCG level.
Non-obstetric etiologies include:pelvic inflammatory diseaseovarian torsionruptured ovarian cysthemorrhagic ovarian cystdegenerating fibroidendometriosispelvic congestion syndromeadenomyosisnon-gynecologic causesappendicitisurolithiasisappendicitisurolithiasisObstetric etiologies include:ectopic pregnancythreatened miscarriageplacental abruptionpostpartumretained products of conceptionendometritisovarian vein thrombosisretained products of conceptionendometritisovarian vein thrombosis

Acute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC) are an early complication of acute pancreatitis that usually develop in the first four weeks.
After four weeks, the term pseudocysts is used.
The absence of necrosis differentiates APFCs from acute necrotic collections (ANC), that is, APFCs occur in interstitial edematous pancreatitis, not in necrotizing pancreatitis.
TerminologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe following are the latest terms according to the updated Atlanta classification to describe fluid collections associated with acute pancreatitis 1,2:fluid collections in interstitial edematous pancreatitisacute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC): in the first 4 weeks: non-encapsulated peripancreatic fluid collectionspseudocysts: develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated peripancreatic or remote fluid collectionsfluid collections in necrotizing pancreatitisacute necrotic collections (ANCs): in the first 4 weeks; non-encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied materialwalled-off necrosis (WON or WOPN): develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied material  acute peripancreatic fluid collections (APFC): in the first 4 weeks: non-encapsulated peripancreatic fluid collectionspseudocysts: develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated peripancreatic or remote fluid collectionsacute necrotic collections (ANCs): in the first 4 weeks; non-encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied materialwalled-off necrosis (WON or WOPN): develop after 4 weeks; encapsulated heterogeneous non-liquefied material  APFCs result from pancreatic/peripancreatic inflammation and/or rupture of one of the small pancreatic side ducts 1.
Homogeneous peripancreatic fluid collection that is non-encapsulated and bound by the retroperitoneum 1,2.
Most acute peripancreatic fluid collections resolve spontaneously in the first few weeks.
They very rarely become infected.
Drainage (surgical/percutaneous) is not recommended 1,2.acute necrotic collection (ANC): radiographic differentiation between it and an acute peripancreatic fluid collection in the first week may prove impossible 1pancreatic necrosis: fluid collections can accumulate within the pancreas (acute peripancreatic fluid collection are always peripancreatic, as their name implies) 1

Acute phlegmonous esophagitis is a very rare form of esophagitis in which there is a diffuse bacterial infection within the submucosa of the esophagus 1.TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisTreatment and prognosisReferencesUsually there is co-infection of the stomach (phlegmonous gastritis), and if both the stomach and esophagus are involved it is called phlegmonous oesophagogastritis 4.
If other parts of the bowel are involved then phlegmonous enterocolitis can be seen.
Acute phlegmonous esophagitis is exceedingly rare, a literature review in 2014 found only 12 reported cases 1.
In this small cohort were ten male and two female patients.
A third of the patients were poorly-controlled diabetics.
Although rare, some constant risk factors have been found 2:old agediabetes mellitusalcoholismmalnutritionimmunosuppressionSevere pain in the neck, midline chest and epigastrium (i.e. in the line of the esophagus) is the main presenting complaint.
Breathlessness has also been experienced is some cases.
The responsible organism for acute phlegmonous esophagitis varies in the literature, most commonly it has found to be Klebsiella pneumoniae.diffuse esophageal mural thickeningesophageal intramural gas 3rim-enhancing foci of low density within the wall of the esophagus, likely representing intraesophageal abscessesconcurrent pleural effusions are commonother findings seen have included ulceration, strictures and a "pseudolumen".dissecting intramural hematoma of the esophagus: high density wall thickening of the entire esophagus.
Clinically presents as chest pain without evidence of infection.corrosive esophagitis: history of acid or base ingestionreflux esophagitis: often accompanied by a sliding esophageal hernia and mainly involves the mid to lower esophagus.
No peripheral rim enhancement on the CT.diffuse esophageal spasmtubular duplication of the esophagus: usually asymptomatic.
Treatment is a mixture of intensive supportive care coupled with specific antimicrobial therapy, and providing timely surgical intervention if necessary.
Mortality rate of phlegmonous gastritis has been reported to be greater than 40%, but all 12 patients who had isolated phlegmonous esophagitis, survived, with appropriate intensive intervention 1.

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APML) is a distinct subtype of acute myeloid leukemia.
It is defined by a balanced translocation between chromosomes 15 and 17 resulting in fusion of the promyelocytic leukemia gene (PML) on chromosome 15 with the retinoic acid receptor alpha gene (RARα) on chromosome 17.differentiation syndromeIt was first described as a distinct entity in 1957.​

Acute pyelonephritis is a bacterial infection of the renal pelvis and parenchyma most commonly seen in young women.
It remains common and continues to have significant morbidity in certain groups of patients.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe incidence of acute pyelonephritis parallels that of lower urinary tract infections: approximately five times more common in females with a sharp increase following puberty 6.Clinical presentation is fairly specific and classical in most cases, consisting of a rapid onset of high fever, flank pain and costovertebral angle tenderness (i.e. positive Murphy kidney punch).
In many instances, less specific or non-urinary symptoms and signs may also be present, which may lead to clinical confusion 1.White cells and bacteria are usually present in the urine, and blood tests reveal the expected changes: leukocytosis and increased C-reactive protein (CRP) and/or erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR).
In severe cases, sepsis may be present.
The most commonly implicated organisms are from the gastrointestinal tract 5:Escherichia coli (most common)Klebsiella spp.
Proteus spp.
Enterobacter spp.
Pseudomonas spp.
Haemophilus influenzaeInfection gains access to the upper urinary tract by passing retrograde up the ureter from the bladder, facilitated by virulence factors which allow bacteria to adhere to the urothelium (e.g. adhesin P) and inhibit ureteric peristalsis (endotoxins) 1,5.
The infection then passes into the collecting tubules and results in an interstitial nephritis, with resulting alterations in renal filtration and blood flow in the affected region.
Localized ischemia secondary to inflammatory changes results in altered imaging and may eventually lead to necrosis and scar 2.Rarely, the kidney may be seeded haematogenously, in which case renal abscesses develop rather than pyelonephritis.
These abscesses usually develop peripherally.
In many instances, the clinical presentation suffices for making the diagnosis.
Situations in which imaging is indicated include:exclude obstructed kidneyhigh-risk patients: diabetics, elderly, immunocompromisedthose with a mixed clinical pictureprevious renal pathologyRadiography has a limited role, especially if patients are likely to go on to CT.
Abdominal radiographs may demonstrate obstructing urinary tract calculi and occasionally may demonstrate gas within the collecting system (emphysematous pyelonephritis).Ultrasound is insensitive to the changes of acute pyelonephritis, with most patients having 'normal' scans.
Abnormalities are identified in only ~25% of cases 1.
Possible features include:particulate matter/debris in the collecting systemreduced areas of cortical vascularity by using power Doppler gas bubbles (emphysematous pyelonephritis)abnormal echogenicity of the renal parenchyma 1focal/segmental hypoechoic regions (in edema) or hyperechoic regions (in hemorrhage)mass-like changefocal/segmental hypoechoic regions (in edema) or hyperechoic regions (in hemorrhage)mass-like changeUltrasound is, however, useful in assessing for local complications such as hydronephrosis, renal abscess formation, renal infarction, perinephric collections, and thus may guide management.
CT is a sensitive modality for evaluation of the renal tract, able to assess for renal calculi, gas, perfusion defects, collections and obstruction.
Unfortunately, it does have a significant radiation burden and should be used sparingly, especially in young patients.
There is usually no need for a three or four phase CT IVP (CT urography).
A single 45-90 second post-contrast scan usually suffices, although clinical acumen may be necessary to choose the best contrast phase 1,3.
For example, if renal colic is suspected then a non-contrast scan is often required to assess for renal calculi.
If renal ischemia is suspected then an arterial scan (15-25 seconds) is ideal to assess perfusion 3.often the kidneys appear normalaffected parts of the kidney may appear edematous, i.e. swollen and of lower attenuationrenal calculi or gas within the collecting system may be evidentperinephric stranding: although not considered a useful sign 7one or more focal wedge-like regions will appear swollen and demonstrate reduced enhancement compared with the normal portions of the kidneythe periphery of the cortex is also affected, helpful in distinguishing acute pyelonephritis from a renal infarct (which tends to spare the periphery; the so-called 'rim sign')if imaged during the excretory phase, a striated nephrogram may also be visible 3,4If for some reason the kidney is imaged again within 3-6 hours, persistent enhancement of the affected regions may be evident due to slow flow of contrast through the involved tubules 1,3.MRI is usually reserved for patients who are pregnant, and findings mirror those seen on CT.
The kidney demonstrates wedge-shaped regions of altered signal:T1: affected region(s) appear hypointense compared with the normal kidney parenchymaT2: hyperintense compared to normal kidney parenchymaT1 C+: reduced enhancementA fast inversion recovery sequence obtained after contrast administration has been shown to be particularly effective in outlining affected regions which appear hyperintense compared to the low signal parenchyma.
The contrast is thought to represent a combination of local edema and decreased T2 signal due to gadolinium in the perfused 'normal' portions 2.Technetium-99m dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) demonstrates a similar reduction in renal perfusion and function, which appears as one or more patchy scintigraphy defects in the outline of the kidneys 2.Most patients respond rapidly to appropriate antibiotic therapy, and often no imaging whatsoever is required.
Even when imaging has been performed, no follow-up imaging is usually required, unless patients do not respond clinically, and it should be stressed that imaging changes can take up to five months to resolve 1.The presence of an upper urinary tract infection in the presence of obstruction can threaten the viability of the kidney and a percutaneous nephrostomy is usually required on an emergency basis.
Complications include 2:lobar nephroniarenal abscessrenal infarction, necrosis and scarringchronic renal impairmenthypertensionrenal vein thrombosis 10in pregnancy: septic shock and premature labor 11General imaging differential considerations include:renal infarctiontypically spares the peripheral aspect of the cortex, giving the cortical rim signother causes of interstitial nephritissarcoidosisdrug-inducedrenal lymphoma: has multiple presentations and can mimic pyelonephritistypically spares the peripheral aspect of the cortex, giving the cortical rim signsarcoidosisdrug-inducedCT is the most sensitive modality for diagnosis and assessment of complicationsCT portal venous phase demonstrating areas of reduced enhancement compared with the normal portions of the kidney is the key for diagnosisstriated nephrogram on CT excretory phaseevidence of obstruction in the setting of pyelonephritis/sepsis is a medical urgency requiring percutaneous nephrostomy

Acute pulmonary schistosomiasis refers to the acute form of pulmonary schistosomiasis.
The acute form usually occurs at around 6 weeks after the infection and is thought to represent an allergic manifestation to the presence of Schistosoma worm or eggs.
Non-specific and may show ill-defined pulmonary nodular shadows.
Described features include 2:small pulmonary nodules ranging from 2 to 15 mmlarger nodules with ground-glass opacity halo schistosomiasis: for a general discussion

Acute radiation syndrome, also called radiation poisoning or radiation sickness, refers to the signs and symptoms associated with the acute effects of high-dose rates of ionizing radiation (usually over 0.5 Gy) through either whole body or partial body irradiation.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRelated articlesReferencesThe exact prevalence of the condition is difficult to establish but people exposed to higher radiation doses and higher dose rates are at the highest risk.
High-risk situations include:radiation therapy nuclear power plant accidentsnuclear or radiological weapons useexposure to orphan sourcesThe syndrome has a number of phases:prodromal phase: symptoms are non-specific but can include: anorexia, diarrhea, fever, erythema of the skin, nausea, vomiting and headache.
This usually appears 1-3 days after exposure.
Lymphopenia is an early sign on blood tests.latent phase: with an apparent improvement in symptoms and may last hours or weeks.symptomatic phase: with a number of possible sub-syndromes occurring such as:hematopoietic symptoms (1-8 Gy): infection, hemorrhagegastrointestinal symptoms (5-20 Gy): diarrhea, electrolyte and fluid disturbances, gastrointestinal bleeding and perforationneurovascular symptoms (>20 Gy): headache, focal neurological deficits, altered level of consciousnessfinal phase: either recovery or death depending on the total dose and dose rate receivedhematopoietic symptoms (1-8 Gy): infection, hemorrhagegastrointestinal symptoms (5-20 Gy): diarrhea, electrolyte and fluid disturbances, gastrointestinal bleeding and perforationneurovascular symptoms (>20 Gy): headache, focal neurological deficits, altered level of consciousnessA variety of factors must be considered when dealing with radiation exposure including the dose, the route of exposure (e.g. external irradiation versus ingestion), the area of the body exposed and the dose rate.
Radiation-induced cytotoxicity causes many of the symptoms of the syndrome together with the inflammatory SIRS-like response to the large degree of cell death.
More rapidly proliferating tissues (e.g. skin, bone marrow) are the most affected.
In the hematopoietic syndrome, white blood cells and platelets are lost predisposing to infection and hemorrhage, which are the most common form of death.
In the gastrointestinal syndrome damage to the mucosal cells results in diarrhea, electrolyte and fluid loss and predisposes to bleeding and perforation.
Damage to endothelial cells in the brain is thought to lead to vasogenic edema and potentially neurological symptoms at high enough doses.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is a form of acute lung injury (ALI) and occurs as a result of a severe pulmonary injury that causes alveolar damage heterogeneously throughout the lung.
It can either result from a direct pulmonary source or as a response to systemic injury.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisLung damage results in leakage of fluid into alveoli, leading to non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema and decreased arterial oxygenation.
The diagnosis is based on mainly clinical criteria set forth by the American-European Consensus Conference 4.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome is characterized by the following criteria 7:lung injury of acute onset, within one week of an apparent clinical insult and with the progression of respiratory symptomsbilateral opacities on chest imaging not explained by other pulmonary pathology (e.g. pleural effusion, pneumothorax, or nodules)respiratory failure not explained by heart failure or volume overloaddecreased arterial PaO2/FiO2 ratiomild ARDS: 201-300 mmHg (≤39.9 kPa)moderate ARDS: 101-200 mmHg (≤26.6 kPa)severe ARDS: ≤100 mmHg (≤13.3 kPa)mild ARDS: 201-300 mmHg (≤39.9 kPa)moderate ARDS: 101-200 mmHg (≤26.6 kPa)severe ARDS: ≤100 mmHg (≤13.3 kPa)It is of note that the clinical diagnosis of ARDS using internationally accepted guidelines and chest radiographs has been demonstrated to correlate poorly with histopathological diagnosis at autopsy 8,9.The causes of ARDS can result from direct lung injury, termed pulmonary ARDS, or extrapulmonary where the triggering insult is outside of the lungs.
These two etiological subtypes respond in different ways to mechanical ventilation.
Some authors have described distinct early phase radiological appearances between the two.fat embolismnear-drowningviral pneumoniaoxygen toxicitysmoke inhalationdisseminated intravascular coagulopathyaspiration of gastric contentsaspiration of barium contrastlung contusionpancreatitisburnstraumasepticemiahypovolemic shockhead injurytransfusion reactioncardiopulmonary bypassabdominal compartment syndromeChest radiographic findings of acute respiratory distress syndrome are non-specific and resemble those of typical pulmonary edema or pulmonary hemorrhage.
There are diffuse bilateral coalescent opacities (the only radiological criterion defined by the Consensus Conference).
The time course of ARDS may help in differentiating it from typical pulmonary edema.
Chest x-ray features usually develop 12-24 hours after initial lung insult as a result of proteinaceous interstitial edema.
Within one week, alveolar pulmonary edema (hyaline membrane) occurs due to type 1 pneumocyte damage.
In contrast to cardiogenic pulmonary edema, which clears in response to diuretic therapy, ARDS persists for days to weeks.
Also, as the initial radiographic findings of ARDS clear, the underlying lung appears to have a reticular pattern secondary to type 2 pneumocyte proliferation and fibrosis 4.Features depend on the phase of the disease 10.pulmonary opacification: often demonstrates an anteroposterior density gradient within the lung, with dense consolidation in the most dependent regions, merging into a background of widespread ground-glass attenuation and then normal or hyperexpanded lung in the non-dependent regions (described as a classical appearance 10)the typical CT presentation of bilateral symmetrical changes is more common in extrapulmonary ARDS, whereas in pulmonary ARDS the opacities tend to be asymmetrical 11ground-glass opacification: a non-specific sign that reflects an overall reduction in the air content of the affected lung.
In acute ARDS likely represent edema and protein within the interstitial and alveolar spacesbronchial dilatation within areas of ground-glass opacificationsome publications also report pulmonary cysts in the early phase 11Postulated reason for inhomogeneity of appearances:increased weight of overlying lung causing compressive atelectasis posteriorly, which produces dense opacificationsupported by the fact that with the positional change from supine to prone, the density gradient can quickly redistribute accordinglyIn the non-dependent portions, the lung may be of normal attenuation, or it may be lower if being mechanically ventilated.
CT appearances can be variable in this phase:complete resolution: may occur in some casescoarse reticular pattern and ground-glass opacification in the anterior (non-dependent) part of the lungs: considered more typical later stage CT appearancesareas of reticular and ground-glass opacificationpulmonary cysts of varying sizes and bullae (probably develop as a result of prolonged ventilation)One described method is the Ichikado CT scoring of acute respiratory distress syndrome.
Acute respiratory distress syndrome carries a high mortality of around 50% 2 and many survivors develop chronic lung disease, with the damaged lung healing by fibrosis.
However a minority do make a full recovery.
It was first described in 1967 by Dave G Ashbough (fl.
2019) et al 13.

Acute right heart syndrome (ARHS) is defined as a sudden deterioration in right ventricular (RV) function and failure of the RV to deliver adequate blood flow to the pulmonary circulation.
This can result in systemic hypoperfusion.
ARHS can occur in several settings 1in the setting of sepsisin the setting of massive pulmonary embolismin the setting of acute respiratory distress syndromeright ventricular straincor pulmonale

Acute sinusitis (rare plural: sinusitides) is an acute inflammation of the paranasal sinus mucosa that lasts less than four weeks and can occur in any of the paranasal sinuses.
If the nasal cavity mucosa is also involved then the term rhinosinusitis may be used.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresFever, headache, postnasal discharge of thick sputum, nasal congestion and an abnormal sense of smell.
Acute sinusitis is a clinical diagnosis characterized by symptom duration of less than 4 weeks 11.
Usually following a viral upper respiratory tract infection.
Dental caries, periapical abscess and oroantral fistulation lead to a spread of infection to the maxillary sinus.
Cystic fibrosis and allergy are risk factors.
Other anatomical variants that may predispose to the inflammation include nasal septal deviation, a spur of the nasal septum and/or frontoethmoidal recess variants.
Patients in an intensive care setting are at an increased risk of acute sinusitis.
Risk factors identified include 10:indwelling nasogastric tubes and/or endotracheal tubesespecially nasotracheal routingprolonged duration on the unityounger ageespecially nasotracheal routingImaging findings are nonspecific and can be seen in a large number of asymptomatic patients (up to 40%) 11.
Imaging findings should be interpreted with clinical and/or endoscopic findings.
A gas-fluid level is the most typical imaging finding.
However, it is only present in 25-50% of patients with acute sinusitis 4.Opacification of the sinuses and gas-fluid level best seen in the maxillary sinus.
It does not allow assessment of the extent of the inflammation and its complications.
The most common method of evaluation.
Better anatomical delineation and assessment of inflammation extension, causes, and complications.
Peripheral mucosal thickening, gas-fluid level in the paranasal sinuses, gas bubbles within the fluid and obstruction of the ostiomeatal complexes are recognized findings.
Rhinitis, often associated with sinusitis, is often characterized by thickening of the turbinates with obliteration of the surrounding air channels.
This should not be confused with the normal nasal cycle.
The maxillary teeth should also be assessed as around 20% of maxillary sinus infections are odontogenic 11.
Signal characteristics of the affected regions includeT1: mucosal thickening is isointense to soft tissue and fluid is hypointenseT2: both mucosal thickening and fluid are, to a variable degree, hyperintenseT1 C+ (Gd): inflamed mucosa enhances whilst fluid does notAlthough not the primary mode of investigation, sonography may be used to screen for maxillary sinusitis; the perturbation of the normal air/fluid ratio in sinusitis alters the acoustic impedance of the usually aerated space.
Normal and abnormal maxillary sinus features may be differentiated as follows:normal maxillary sinusa series of horizontal reverberation artifacts extend into the far-field, diminishing with each successive iteration, parallel to the prominent near field linear echogenic cortex of the maxilla 9the far-field is ill-defined, and the posterior wall of the sinus is not visibleabnormal maxillary sinuscomplete sinusogram 5sagittal insonation reveals the absence of horizontal reverberation artifacts, replaced by an anechoic spaceposterior wall appears in the far-field as an echogenic stripe transverse insonation reveals this echolucent space bordered by the medial and lateral wallsthis indicates the sinus is fluid-filled and is highly suggestive of sinusitis in the appropriate clinical contextpartial sinusogramsagittal visualization of a portion of the posterior wall, with adjacent horizontal reverberation artifactsmedial/lateral walls obscured nonspecific finding, but increased specificity if partial sinusogram present while semi-supine and absent when supine 6this indicates an air-fluid level and is considered positive for sinusitispresence when both semi-supine and supine thought to be indicative of mucosal thickening 7a series of horizontal reverberation artifacts extend into the far-field, diminishing with each successive iteration, parallel to the prominent near field linear echogenic cortex of the maxilla 9the far-field is ill-defined, and the posterior wall of the sinus is not visiblecomplete sinusogram 5sagittal insonation reveals the absence of horizontal reverberation artifacts, replaced by an anechoic spaceposterior wall appears in the far-field as an echogenic stripe transverse insonation reveals this echolucent space bordered by the medial and lateral wallsthis indicates the sinus is fluid-filled and is highly suggestive of sinusitis in the appropriate clinical contextpartial sinusogramsagittal visualization of a portion of the posterior wall, with adjacent horizontal reverberation artifactsmedial/lateral walls obscured nonspecific finding, but increased specificity if partial sinusogram present while semi-supine and absent when supine 6this indicates an air-fluid level and is considered positive for sinusitispresence when both semi-supine and supine thought to be indicative of mucosal thickening 7sagittal insonation reveals the absence of horizontal reverberation artifacts, replaced by an anechoic spaceposterior wall appears in the far-field as an echogenic stripe transverse insonation reveals this echolucent space bordered by the medial and lateral wallsthis indicates the sinus is fluid-filled and is highly suggestive of sinusitis in the appropriate clinical contextsagittal visualization of a portion of the posterior wall, with adjacent horizontal reverberation artifactsmedial/lateral walls obscured nonspecific finding, but increased specificity if partial sinusogram present while semi-supine and absent when supine 6this indicates an air-fluid level and is considered positive for sinusitispresence when both semi-supine and supine thought to be indicative of mucosal thickening 7this indicates an air-fluid level and is considered positive for sinusitispresence when both semi-supine and supine thought to be indicative of mucosal thickening 7Conservative medical treatment until the inflammation subsides and treatment of the cause, e.g. dental caries.
If it becomes chronic sinusitis, functional endoscopic sinus surgery may be considered.erosion through bonesubperiosteal abscessfrontal sinus superficially (Pott puffy tumor)frontal or ethmoidal sinuses into the orbit (subperiosteal abscess of the orbit)dural venous sinus thrombosisintracranial extensionmeningitissubdural empyemacerebral abscesssubperiosteal abscessfrontal sinus superficially (Pott puffy tumor)frontal or ethmoidal sinuses into the orbit (subperiosteal abscess of the orbit)frontal sinus superficially (Pott puffy tumor)frontal or ethmoidal sinuses into the orbit (subperiosteal abscess of the orbit)meningitissubdural empyemacerebral abscess

Useful mnemonics to remember the symptoms of acute stroke are:FASTBE-FASTF = face (look uneven?)A = arm (drift down?)S = speech (sound strange or difficulty speaking)T = time (brain cells die every second)B = balance (sudden loss of balance)E = eye (sudden loss of vision)+ FASTIn one study 1, FAST alone would miss 14% of patients with acute stroke whereas BE-FAST would miss 2.6% of patients with acute stroke.

Acute spinal cord ischemia syndrome is uncommon, but usually presents with profound neurological signs and symptoms, and the prognosis is poor.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAcute spinal cord ischemia syndrome represents only 5-8% of acute myelopathies 4,5 and <1% of all strokes 7.
The demographic of affected individuals will reflect the underlying cause, although generally, two peaks are present with different etiologies.
In childhood, most cases are due to trauma or cardiac malformations 5.
In contrast, adults tend to be affected in later life, and when a cause is usually identified the result of atherosclerosis, and related complications (e.g. thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysm, thromboembolism) 5.
The majority of patients developed symptoms quickly, with maximal symptomatology reached within 12 hours for >50% of patients and within 72 hours for the vast majority of patients 1,5.Initial symptoms include severe back pain (60-70%), loss of bladder control (60%) and bowel control (40%) 4,5.
Perhaps a little counter-intuitive, given that the anterior cord is most commonly involved, the first symptom noticed is more frequently sensory (60%) 4.
Although the exact nature of neurological impairment depends on the pattern and level of involvement, generally impairment is sudden and severe with an inability to walk due to paraplegia and paraparesis with quadriplegia or tetraplegia seen in patients with higher cord lesions.
Almost all patients have some sensory disturbance, and the majority of patients require urinary catheterization 1.
The pattern of neurological impairment can be divided into a number of separate entities, although there is much variability in the nomenclature and description of these patterns in the literature.
A perhaps somewhat simplistic approach, but one that most people would agree with, divides spinal cord infarcts into two common patterns according to which spinal artery is involved 4,5:anterior spinal artery syndrome (most common)bilateral (due to single midline anterior spinal artery)paralysis below affected level (initially flaccid; later spastic)pain and temperature sensory lossrelative sparing of proprioception and vibration (dorsal columns)incompleteanterior horn syndromeman-in-the-barrel syndrome if cervical 5posterior spinal artery syndromeusually unilateral (due to paired posterior spinal arteries) complete sensory loss at the level of injuryproprioception and vibration loss below levelminimal, typically transient, motor symptomsbilateral (due to single midline anterior spinal artery)paralysis below affected level (initially flaccid; later spastic)pain and temperature sensory lossrelative sparing of proprioception and vibration (dorsal columns)incompleteanterior horn syndromeman-in-the-barrel syndrome if cervical 5anterior horn syndromeman-in-the-barrel syndrome if cervical 5usually unilateral (due to paired posterior spinal arteries) complete sensory loss at the level of injuryproprioception and vibration loss below levelminimal, typically transient, motor symptomsThere are a number of less common presentations, which vary widely in terminology, including 5: central spinal cord infarct (often the result of severe hypotension)sulcal artery syndrome (resulting in a partial Brown-Séquard syndrome)complete transverse spinal cord infarction (aka transverse medullary infarction)Overall causes include 1,4,5: idiopathic (most common)atherosclerosis (~33%) 4aortic pathologyaortic aneurysmaortic thrombosisaortic dissectionaortic surgery/interventionvertebral artery dissection/occlusionatherosclerosis of vessels directly supplying the cordtrauma, e.g. stabbingother rarer reported causes 4cardiac embolismfibrocartilaginous embolismCaisson disease: decompression sickness from scruba divingcoagulopathy and hematological disorders (e.g. sickle cell disease)spinal arteriovenous malformationssystemic hypotensionepidural anesthesiaradiation-induced vasculopathyvasculitis including cocainesympathectomygastrectomyesophagectomyaortic pathologyaortic aneurysmaortic thrombosisaortic dissectionaortic surgery/interventionvertebral artery dissection/occlusionatherosclerosis of vessels directly supplying the cordaortic aneurysmaortic thrombosisaortic dissectionaortic surgery/interventioncardiac embolismfibrocartilaginous embolismCaisson disease: decompression sickness from scruba divingcoagulopathy and hematological disorders (e.g. sickle cell disease)spinal arteriovenous malformationssystemic hypotensionepidural anesthesiaradiation-induced vasculopathyvasculitis including cocainesympathectomygastrectomyesophagectomyIt is worth noting that whether chronic degenerative change of the cord, with osteophytes or disc protrusions compressing the cord, is an underlying cause of acute spinal cord ischemia is controversial 4.
MRI is the gold standard in imaging the spinal cord and should be obtained in all patients with suspected cord infarction, not only to confirm the diagnosis but perhaps more importantly to exclude other more readily treated causes of cord impairment (e.g. compression).The hallmark of spinal cord infarction is the presence of abnormal T2 signal within the cord, the pattern of which will depend on the territory.
Diffusion-weighted imaging is challenging in the spine, largely due to physiological CSF flow induced artifact, but can show restricted diffusion, is being increasingly used 2-3.
In the acute phase, the cord can also appear expanded due to edema.
Involvement of the anterior spinal artery represents the majority of cases, and the anterior and central portion of the cord are involved, most frequently bilaterally.
In many instances, the anterior horn cells are primarily involved and demonstrate prominent high T2 signal resulting in pencil-like hyperintensities extending over a number of levels.
On axial imaging, this appears as two bright dots, the so-called owl eye appearance 1.Central involvement can be more extensive than this, involving not only the grey matter but also the central white matter, sparing only a thin rim of surrounding peripheral white matter 1.
In some instances, the adjacent vertebral body demonstrates infarction, although this is not a common finding 5,7.
Usually, involvement of the posterior spinal arteries is unilateral (as posterior spinal arteries are paired) and are usually confined to the dorsal columns 5.
Not surprisingly, the degree of involvement of the cord and degree of swelling herald a poor prognosis, with many patients not being able to walk and requiring long-term urinary catheterization.
Patients who have intact proprioceptive sensation, implying spared dorsal columns, have a better prognosis, as do those with smaller infarcts (e.g. those with owl eye appearance) 1.
Even better prognosis can be expected in patients with single sulcal artery occlusion (sulcal artery syndrome).In one study, of patients who survived and were able to be followed up ~50% were eventually able to walk independently, 30% were able to do so with walking aids, and 20% remained wheelchair bound 4.
Similar outcomes were found for urinary continence, with ~50% having regained normal function, 30% having intermittent incontinence, and 20% requiring persistent catheterization 4.

Acute superior mesenteric artery (SMA) occlusion, which can then result in acute mesenteric ischemia, can be a life-threatening event related to the artery supplying the majority of the small bowel and right side of the colon.
Epidemiology Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresAn acute occlusion is an uncommon event that typically affects elderly patients, who are at an increased risk of other cardiovascular events.
Clinical presentation is variable and unfortunately often non-specific such that the diagnosis is not made for some time.
It may be dramatic with acute onset severe abdominal pain or can be less well-defined 4,9.Acute occlusion can be due to a number of causes 3,4,9:embolic event: ~50% (range 40-60%)acute in situ thrombosis superimposed on atherosclerosis: 15-30%aortic dissection with the involvement of the SMA originslow flow or idiopathic Risk factors, therefore, include:advanced agesmokingprothrombotic tendencyantiphospholipid antibodies, etc.
2valvular/cardiac abnormalitiesmechanical heart valveatrial fibrillationacute myocardial ischemiaventricular aneurysmright-to-left shuntpatent foramen ovale/atrial septal defect with paradoxical embolismantiphospholipid antibodies, etc.
2mechanical heart valveatrial fibrillationacute myocardial ischemiaventricular aneurysmpatent foramen ovale/atrial septal defect with paradoxical embolismUltrasound is able to demonstrate normal flow in both the SMA and SMV but is incapable of assessing side branches or the bowel wall.
It has little role in the acute management of this condition.
Computed tomography is widely accepted as the first-line imaging technique for evaluation 7 due to its speed, widespread availability and ability to diagnose alternative causes of acute abdominal pain.
For a discussion on CT technique, refer to the intestinal ischemia article.
Findings in acute SMA occlusion include 5,6,9:arterial changes: lack of enhancement of the lumen of the SMA and/or its branchesembolism lodgement location varies15% at the origin of the SMA50% immediately distal to the origin of the middle colic arterythrombosis usually occurs in the proximal 2 cm of the SMAbowel changes: reflecting reduction/obliteration of blood supplymucosal/serosal enhancement absentthicknessvariablein pure arterial occlusion, the wall may be thinned (a.k.a.
paper-thin wall) due to loss of intestinal muscular tone and absence of blood supplya thickened wall may also be present but does not correlate with severityileus / dilated loops of bowel: >3 cm in diameterair-fluid or blood-fluid levels: due to dysfunctional peristalsisnecrotic mural gas may be present: pneumatosis intestinalisother changesmesenteric edemafree fluidintrahepatic portal venous gas: due to pneumatosis intestinalisfree intra-abdominal gascauses: e.g. intracardiac thrombus in a dilated left ventricleembolism lodgement location varies15% at the origin of the SMA50% immediately distal to the origin of the middle colic arterythrombosis usually occurs in the proximal 2 cm of the SMA15% at the origin of the SMA50% immediately distal to the origin of the middle colic arterymucosal/serosal enhancement absentthicknessvariablein pure arterial occlusion, the wall may be thinned (a.k.a.
paper-thin wall) due to loss of intestinal muscular tone and absence of blood supplya thickened wall may also be present but does not correlate with severityileus / dilated loops of bowel: >3 cm in diameterair-fluid or blood-fluid levels: due to dysfunctional peristalsisnecrotic mural gas may be present: pneumatosis intestinalisvariablein pure arterial occlusion, the wall may be thinned (a.k.a.
paper-thin wall) due to loss of intestinal muscular tone and absence of blood supplya thickened wall may also be present but does not correlate with severitymesenteric edemafree fluidintrahepatic portal venous gas: due to pneumatosis intestinalisfree intra-abdominal gasOnce the gold standard for diagnosis, now reserved for patients who may benefit from endovascular intervention.
An acute SMA occlusion carries a mortality of 75-90% despite treatment 3,5.
Treatment options include 4:endovascular thrombectomyintraluminal papaverinesurgical thrombectomy with resection of non-salvageable infarcted bowelmesenteric arteritis splanchnic venous occlusion: superior mesenteric vein or portal vein thrombosis rather than arterial occlusion 1chronic arterial occlusion with an alternative cause for abdominal pain: identification of well-formed collaterals may suggest that the occlusion is chronicsmall bowel obstructionCrohn disease: in most cases, a significantly different patient group

Acute tubular necrosis is a common type of acute kidney injury, particularly in hospitalized patients.
Acute tubular necrosis is characterized by renal tubular cell damage and death and is usually caused by ischemic or nephrotoxic insults.
Deposition of cellular debris within the tubules results in oliguria.
Urine microscopy for renal tubular epithelial cells and granular casts may be helpful to confirm a diagnosis.hypovolemia/ischemiadehydrationblood loss / renal hypoperfusionseptic shockdrugsamphotericin Biodinated contrast mediacisplatinsulfa drugsantiviral (acyclovir, cidofovir, foscarnet)immunosuppressant (tacrolimus, cyclosporine, everolimus)chemotherapy (cisplatin, ifosfamide, temsirolimus)dehydrationblood loss / renal hypoperfusionseptic shockamphotericin Biodinated contrast mediacisplatinsulfa drugsantiviral (acyclovir, cidofovir, foscarnet)immunosuppressant (tacrolimus, cyclosporine, everolimus)chemotherapy (cisplatin, ifosfamide, temsirolimus)Imaging demonstrates preserved renal parenchyma perfusion, but with minimal or absent excretion into the urinary collecting system.
Imaging with iodinated contrast typically demonstrates an immediate or mildly delayed nephrogram, but without excretion into the collecting system.
Delayed 24 hour imaging would also demonstrate persistent nephrogram or striated nephrogram due to stasis of contrast within the renal tubules 3,4.Ultrasound is usually performed in this setting to assess the renal parenchyma and exclude other causes of obstruction.
In acute tubular necrosis, the kidneys usually have a normal appearance on ultrasound, but may be enlarged and increased echogenicity 5.Renal scintigraphy can help differentiate acute tubular necrosis from other causes of renal failure such as renal cortical necrosis.
It is also often used to evaluate renal transplants when there is a suspicion for acute tubular necrosis of the transplant.
Renal perfusion is preserved during angiographic phase with a gradual increase of radiotracer due to minimal or absent excretion 1.

Acute superior mesenteric vein thrombosis is one of the less common causes of intestinal ischemia.
Often despite thrombosis of the SMV, small bowel necrosis does not occur, presumably due to persistent arterial supply and some venous drainage via collaterals.
For a general discussion refer to intestinal ischemia.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresCompared to acute superior mesenteric artery occlusion or ischemia secondary to small bowel obstruction, acute superior mesenteric vein thrombosis is uncommon, accounting for only 5-15% of all cases of acute mesenteric ischemia 1-3.
Acute superior mesenteric vein thrombosis presents vaguely as an acute abdomen with gradually worsening diffuse, colicky abdominal pain, associated with distention, and symptoms may have been present for a few days 2,3.
Heme-positive stool may also be present 3.
As ischemia progresses, eventual necrosis, perforation, sepsis and shock ensue.
As the superior mesenteric vein thrombosis, back pressure builds as arterial supply to the bowel is uninterrupted.
This leads to bowel wall edema (and thus bowel wall thickening) and possible intramural hemorrhage (leading to hyperdense bowel wall) 1.
Depending on the how complete occlusion is, and whether or not collateral drainage is available, the combination of back pressure, and bowel wall thickening can lead to inadequate tissue perfusion leading to intestinal ischemia, infarction and eventual necrosis 1.
The majority of cases are considered secondary to an identifiable underlying condition, including 1-3: hypercoagulable statesmalignancypolycythemia veraprotein C deficiencyprotein S deficiencyantithrombin III deficiencyrecent abdominal surgeryintra-abdominal or systemic sepsisportal hypertensionmechanical narrowing due to adjacent malignancymalignancypolycythemia veraprotein C deficiencyprotein S deficiencyantithrombin III deficiencyApproximately 20-40% of cases have no clear precipitant and are considered idiopathic 3.
Imaging is the only reliable way of making the diagnosis, especially as clinical presentation is vague.
CT is the most accurate test available to us at present, with excellent sensitivity (up to 100%).
Ultrasound and catheter mesenteric angiography are reported to have ~70% sensitivity 3 but in practice are infrequently requested as a first line investigation, unless the presentation suggests another diagnosis (e.g. cholecystitis).
For a discussion on CT technique refer to intestinal ischemia article.
The findings in superior mesenteric vein thrombosis include 1:vascular changesfilling defect in the superior mesenteric vein and branches (seen in 90% of cases)mesenteric congestion and strandingbowel changestypically thickened (most common finding): due to hemorrhage or edema8-9 mm (usually <15 mm)normal wall thickness is 3-4 mmtarget signdensity (variable)hypoattenuating due to edemahyperdense wall on non-contrast images (due to intramural hemorrhage)enhancement (variable)absent once infarcted (more common in arterial occlusion)hyperenhancement or target appearance prolonged enhancementpneumatosis intestinalis: due to transmural infarctiondilated and fluid-filled lumenother changesascitesfilling defect in the superior mesenteric vein and branches (seen in 90% of cases)mesenteric congestion and strandingtypically thickened (most common finding): due to hemorrhage or edema8-9 mm (usually <15 mm)normal wall thickness is 3-4 mmtarget signdensity (variable)hypoattenuating due to edemahyperdense wall on non-contrast images (due to intramural hemorrhage)enhancement (variable)absent once infarcted (more common in arterial occlusion)hyperenhancement or target appearance prolonged enhancementpneumatosis intestinalis: due to transmural infarctiondilated and fluid-filled lumen8-9 mm (usually <15 mm)normal wall thickness is 3-4 mmtarget signhypoattenuating due to edemahyperdense wall on non-contrast images (due to intramural hemorrhage)absent once infarcted (more common in arterial occlusion)hyperenhancement or target appearance prolonged enhancementascitesTraditionally management has been surgical, with assessment of the small bowel for necrosis and resection of necrotic bowel, followed by anticoagulation.
This has a reported mortality rate of 7-20% 2,3, which, although still high, is much better than 92-100% mortality with conservative management 3.Surgery is clearly still required in patients with intestinal infarction; however, in patients where this has not yet occurred, endovascular thrombolysis/thrombectomy is a viable option 2,3.
Thrombolytic agents can be introduced either via a superior mesenteric artery catheter or a transhepatic transportal retrograde approach, whereas mechanic clot lysis can only be achieved via a retrograde transhepatic venous approach 2.
Probably the safest way to directly access the portal circulation is via a transjugular-transhepatic approach (similar to the initial steps of a TIPS).
A direct transhepatic approach has also been performed but is associated with a greater risk of hemorrhage 5.
Complications include 3:surgical complicationsabscessanastomosis breakdownshort bowel syndromerecurrent mesenteric thrombosis: 14%, usually within six weeksabscessanastomosis breakdownshort bowel syndromeIf a superior mesenteric vein thrombus/filling defect can be identified, no differential diagnosis exists.
In cases where a filling defect cannot be identified, the differential diagnosis is essentially that of bowel wall thickening and includes:vascularacute superior mesenteric artery occlusionischemia due to hypotensionsubmucosal hemorrhage or hematomainflammation/infectionCrohn diseaseradiation enteritistyphlitisneoplasmpseudothickening related to incomplete distention and residual fluidacute superior mesenteric artery occlusionischemia due to hypotensionsubmucosal hemorrhage or hematomaCrohn diseaseradiation enteritistyphlitis

Acute unilateral airspace opacification is a subset of the differential diagnosis for airspace opacification.
The exhaustive list of all possible causes would be huge, but a useful framework includes:pus, i.e. infectionbacterial pneumoniafungal pneumoniaviral pneumoniaatypical pneumoniaaspiration pneumoniafluidunilateral pulmonary edemabloodpulmonary contusionpulmonary hemorrhageanticoagulationbleeding diathesisGoodpasture syndromeembolipulmonary embolism (PE)fat embolismamniotic fluid embolism: usually bilateralcellsbronchoalveolar carcinomabacterial pneumoniafungal pneumoniaviral pneumoniaatypical pneumoniaaspiration pneumoniaunilateral pulmonary edemapulmonary contusionpulmonary hemorrhageanticoagulationbleeding diathesisGoodpasture syndromeanticoagulationbleeding diathesisGoodpasture syndromepulmonary embolism (PE)fat embolismamniotic fluid embolism: usually bilateralbronchoalveolar carcinoma

Differentiating between acute and chronic infarction on a CT brain is an important skill for many health professionals particularly in the emergency setting:pathologyacute: cytotoxic edemachronic: encephalomalacia; Wallerian degenerationhypoattenuationacute: more dense than CSFchronic: CSF density mass effectacute: positive (volume gain) sulcal / ventricular effacementmidline shift / herniation chronic: negative (volume loss)widened sulciex vacuo dilatation of ipsilateral ventricleacute: cytotoxic edemachronic: encephalomalacia; Wallerian degenerationacute: more dense than CSFchronic: CSF density acute: positive (volume gain) sulcal / ventricular effacementmidline shift / herniation chronic: negative (volume loss)widened sulciex vacuo dilatation of ipsilateral ventriclesulcal / ventricular effacementmidline shift / herniation widened sulciex vacuo dilatation of ipsilateral ventricle

Acyanotic congenital heart disease comprises numerous etiologies, which can be divided into those with increased pulmonary vascularity (pulmonary plethora) and those with normal vascularity:increased pulmonary vascularityventricular septal defect (VSD)atrial septal defect (ASD)atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)other less commonGerbode defectaortopulmonary windowruptured aneurysm of Valsalvacoronary artery fistulapartial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR)normal pulmonary vascularitysmall shunts (see above)aortic valve stenosisaortic coarctationpulmonary stenosisventricular septal defect (VSD)atrial septal defect (ASD)atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)other less commonGerbode defectaortopulmonary windowruptured aneurysm of Valsalvacoronary artery fistulapartial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR)Gerbode defectaortopulmonary windowruptured aneurysm of Valsalvacoronary artery fistulapartial anomalous pulmonary venous return (PAPVR)small shunts (see above)aortic valve stenosisaortic coarctationpulmonary stenosisNote that certain congenital defects may initially cause acyanotic congenital heart disease and later cyanotic congenital heart disease.
Conditions with a left-to-right shunt (e.g. VSD, ASD) may initially be acyanotic but over time can cause maladaptive changes in the right ventricle and pulmonary vasculature, leading to pulmonary hypertension and Eisenmenger syndrome.
When this occurs, the shunt is reversed and deoxygenated blood enters the systemic circulation.

Adamantinomas are rare primary malignant bone tumors that in the vast majority of cases occur in the tibia of young patients.
TerminologyEpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIn the past, ameloblastomas, which are benign, locally aggressive bone tumors of the mandible, were also known as adamantinomas of the mandible.
The two entities are histologically unrelated, and for this reason, adamantinomas are no longer subcategorised as those of the mandible and those of long bones.
Typically presents in the 2nd to 3rd decades as a locally aggressive mass 3 to 15 cm in diameter.
There is a slight male predilection (1.3:1).
Patients usually present with dull pain of gradual onset.
The occurrence is almost exclusively confined to the tibial diaphysis (especially the anterior cortex) 2,5.
Since it is a low-grade malignancy, it has the propensity to metastasize to distant locations including lung, bone, lymph nodes, pericardium, and liver.
Typically, it appears as a multilocular or slightly expansile osteolytic cortical lesion.
This may be visualized as areas of lysis interspersed with areas of sclerosis 3.
Lesions tend to have an eccentric epicenter 4 and a lack of periosteal reaction.
There may be locally aggressive disease at presentation.
Some authors have distinguished two morphologic patterns 2:solitary lobulated focus multiple small nodules in one or more foci In some patients separated tumor foci may be seen, defined as foci of high signal intensity on either T2- or contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images, interspersed with normal-appearing cortical or cancellous bone 2.
A fluid-fluid level may occasionally be seen.
C+ (Gd): tends to show intense and homogeneous static enhancement, although there is no uniform dynamic enhancement pattern 2Surgical, en bloc resection is often performed.
It is a locally aggressive tumor with distant metastases reported in around 15% of cases 1.
Adamantinoma is derived from the Greek word 'adamantinos', which means 'very hard'.
It was first observed in the shaft of an ulna in 1900 by C Maier 8, who believed it was a carcinoma, although the term 'adamantinoma' was coined by B Fisher in 1913 9.Imaging differential considerations include 6:chondromyxoid fibromafibrous dysplasiaosteofibrous dysplasia: has a more ground-glass texture on CT

The Adams forward bend test is clinical test to assess the presence of a scoliosis.
Exclusion of a limb length discrepancy is considered important prior to performing the test.
The patient is asked to bend forward with feet together, arms hanging and knees extended until the back becomes horizontal,The examiner assesses from behind looking for indicators of scoliosis which include:spinal asymmetryunlevelled shouldersscapular asymmetryunlevelled hipshead not lining up with the pelvisa rib humpIt was first described by William Adams in 1865 1.

The Adams-Oliver syndrome (AOS) is a rare disorder characterized by aplasia cutis congenita (missing hair and/or skin) and variable degrees of terminal transverse limb defects.polymicrogyria: can be associated with a variant of Adams-Oliver syndrome 3

ADC pseudonormalization is a normal phase encountered in the subacute stage of ischemic stroke and represents an apparent return to normal healthy brain values on ADC maps which does not, however, represent true resolution of ischemic damage.
ADC pseudonormalization is seen typically around 1 week following ischemic stroke and is thought to be due to a combination of cell wall breakdown and increase of extracellular edema (both of which result in facilitated diffusion - increased ADC values) 2.
At some point, these processes, combined with residual true abnormal restricted diffusion due to cellular swelling, result in ADC values ostensibly returning to those of a normal, healthy brain.
It is important to realize that at the point that ADC values normalize, DWI images (e.g. b = 1000 s/mm2) will continue to show increased signal due to T2 shine-through.
It is only later (around 10-15 days) that DWI pseudonormalization occurs, when ADC values are higher than normal, offsetting the gradually waning T2 signal.
Note: ADC pseudonormalization should not be confused with early DWI reversal (a.k.a.
diffusion lesion reversal), which is seen early in the course of ischemic infarction, particularly in the setting of reperfusion therapy.
Nor should it be confused with T2 washout seen a little later.

Adding images to an article is an important way of illustrating various imaging examples of that condition.
Ideally, there should only be one image per case (usually the 'best' image) per article unless you wish to highlight a specific point, or it is a rare condition with only one case available to illustrate a variety of features/modalities.
visit the case you wish to includefind the specific image you wantclick the little pin icon on the top left of the imagevisit the article you wish to add the image toenter edit mode by clicking the "edit article" button (top right)click "add image" (to the right of the title)the image management console will loadclick the "pinned images" tab and find your recently pinned imageclick the green cross icon (top left of the image thumbnail)close the image management consoleclick black caption bar"edit caption" pop up box will appearadd Case X or Figure Y (see below)For consistency captions should be in the following format: [Case X]  or [Case X]: [description], description is optional.
Examples:Case 1Case 1: glioblastomaFigure 1: histologyNote: there should only be two spaces, one between the word "case" and the number, and the second between the colon and the description.
The order of sequential cases (i.e. Case 1, Case 2, Case 3) if from left to right and then row by row (i.e. the top row is Case 1 and Case 2.
The second row is Case 3 and Case 4).
Figures can be interspersed with the cases, but generally, Figure 1 should be on in the top row along with Case 1.

Additive manufacturing is a process, such as stereolithography, in which objects are created by adding layer after layer from the ground up.
This process can be contrasted with subtractive manufacturing, a process in which unneeded material is removed to create the desired object in the same way a sculptor might chisel a block of stone to create a sculpture.
Additive manufacturing is part of the process behind creating almost all 3D printed objects used in medicine.
Although additive manufacturing has some disadvantages at present compared to traditional methods of making objects such as injection molding or subtractive manufacturing, it also has some distinct advantages.
Potential disadvantages of the additive process are that at present it is not time or cost-effective to mass-produce objects and the physics of the permitted materials used and how they are built in some cases means that objects created are somewhat weaker than those made in a subtractive process.
Advantages of additive techniques include easier prototyping and customization of objects to specific patients and the ability to create extremely complex, partially hollow objects that could not be created with other methods as well as less material waste.

The adductor brevis is a muscle in the medial compartment of the thigh that lies immediately deep to the pectineus and adductor longus.origin: external surface of body of pubis and inferior pubic ramusinsertion: posterior surface of proximal femur, linea aspera, medial supracondylar lineaction: adducts and medially rotates thigh at hip jointarterial supply: profunda femorisinnervation: obturator nerve

Adductor canal syndrome (also known as adductor canal compression syndrome) is a rare, non-atherosclerotic cause of arterial occlusion and limb ischemia 1.
There is compression of the superficial femoral artery (SFA) in the adductor canal.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesExternal compression of the superficial femoral artery in the absence of atherosclerotic risk factors causing adductor canal syndrome is rare and available data is limited to case reports 1.
The syndrome is most commonly reported in young males less than 45 years old 2.Presentation can vary depending on the severity of the occlusion.
The most severe present with symptoms of acute limb ischemia 1.
Compression of the saphenous nerve without vascular involvement can cause pain over the medial aspect of the knee.
Symptoms include 2:exercise induced claudicationparaesthesiapainedema (due to femoral vein compression)pallorpoikilothermiathrombosis leading to acute limb ischemiaThere is chronic external compression of the superficial femoral artery as it courses through the adductor canal 1.
This results in injury to the vessel, in situ thrombosis, limb ischemia and potential limb loss 3,4.
The sources of external compression may arise from either an anomalous musculotendinous band arising from the adductor magnus or hypertrophy of the adductor magnus or vastus medialis muscles 2,3,5.Treatment is always surgical and involves resection or release of the external compressive forces 1.
Angioplasty or bypass of the diseased superficial femoral artery may be required if the mechanical compression has caused vascular damage.
Acute limb ischemia due to thrombosis from adductor canal syndrome requires immediate revascularization either via endovascular thrombolysis or thromboembolectomy 1.
Diagnosis of adductor canal syndrome should prompt investigation for the same condition on the contralateral side 6.popliteal artery entrapment syndrome

The adductor canal (also known as the Hunter canal or subsartorial canal)  is a muscular tunnel in the thigh.
It commences at the inferior end of the femoral triangle and terminates at the adductor hiatus.
from apex of the femoral triangle to the adductor hiatus anteriorly: sartorius muscle, fascia, subsartorial plexus posteromedially: adductor longus (superiorly) and adductor magnus (inferiorly)laterally: vastus medialis musclesuperficial femoral artery and veinsaphenous nervenerve to vastus medialis musclefemoral artery is always between the femoral vein and saphenous nervefemoral vein spirals from medial to the artery in the femoral triangle to posterior to the artery in the adductor canalfemoral artery gives descending genicular artery as it leaves the adductor hiatus The adductor canal was discovered by renowned Scottish surgeon John Hunter (1728-1793), as part of his pioneering work in treating popliteal aneurysms by ligating the femoral artery (standard treatment in the 18th century was amputation!).
His older brother was William Hunter (1718-1783) also a well-known anatomist and obstetrician 4-6.

The adductor longus is a muscle in the medial compartment of the thigh that lies anterior to the adductor magnus.origin: external surface of body of pubis (triangular depression inferior to pubic crest and lateral to pubic symphysis)insertion: linea aspera on middle one-third of shaft of femuraction: adducts and medially rotates thigh at hip jointarterial supply: profunda femorisinnervation: obturator nerve

The adductor hallucis muscle arises by two heads, an oblique and transverse head.
It is responsible for adducting the big toe.origintransverse head: ligaments associated with metatarsophalangeal joints of lateral three toesoblique head: bases of metatarsals II to IV and from sheath covering fibularis longusinsertion: lateral side of base of proximal phalanx of great toeaction: adducts great toe at metatarsophalangeal jointarterial supply: lateral plantar arteryinnervation: lateral plantar nerve from tibial nervetransverse head: ligaments associated with metatarsophalangeal joints of lateral three toesoblique head: bases of metatarsals II to IV and from sheath covering fibularis longus

The adductor magnus is the largest and deepest of the muscles in the medial compartment of the thigh.
Like the adductor longus and brevis muscles, the adductor magnus is a triangular or fan shaped muscle anchored by its apex to the pelvis and attached by its expanded base to the femur.
SummaryGross anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesoriginadductor part: ischiopubic ramushamstring part: ischial tuberosityinsertionadductor part: posterior surface of proximal femur, linea aspera, medial supracondylar linehamstring part: adductor tubercle and supracondylar lineaction: adducts and medially rotates thigh at hip jointarterial supply: profunda femorisinnervationadductor part: obturator nerve (L2-L4)hamstring part: sciatic nerve (L4-S1)adductor part: ischiopubic ramushamstring part: ischial tuberosityadductor part: posterior surface of proximal femur, linea aspera, medial supracondylar linehamstring part: adductor tubercle and supracondylar lineadductor part: obturator nerve (L2-L4)hamstring part: sciatic nerve (L4-S1)Near the base of the adductor magnus muscle is the adductor hiatus which is the terminal portion of the adductor canal 4.
The contents of the adductor canal include the superficial femoral artery and vein, nerve to vastus medialis and saphenous nerve.
When the superficial femoral artery and vein exit the adductor hiatus and enter the popliteal fossa they become the popliteal artery and vein respectively.adductor canal syndrome 5,6

The adductor minimus is a small, variably present muscle in the medial compartment of the thigh.
origin: ischiopubic ramusinsertion: medial lip of linea aspera, adductor tubercle action: adducts, extends and laterally rotates thigh at hip jointarterial supply: medial femoral circumflex artery, first perforating branch of profunda femorisinnervation: obturator nerve (part inserting on linea aspera), tibial division of sciatic nerve (part inserting on adductor tubercle)The adductor minimus is considered to be the superior most division of adductor magnus and is variable in its anatomy, being either completely separate, partially or completely fused to the upper border of adductor magnus 1.
The first perforating branch of the profunda femoris artery delineates the inferior border of adductor minimus from the superior border of adductor magnus.

Abrodil (marketed as Skiodan in the US) was a water-based iodinated contrast medium introduced for clinical use in 1930 3.
It was developed by Bronner, Hecht and Schueller in Germany.
Chemically, Abrodil is the sodium salt of monoiodomethanesulfonic acid.
It was initially employed for intravenous pyelography, but it became popular for myelography and first tried in 1931.
It was commonly employed in Scandinavia but never gained traction elsewhere, primarily due to its associated leptomeningeal irritation.

The absent bow tie sign represents the loss of the normal appearance of the menisci on parasagittal MRI images and is suggestive of meniscal injury.
Normally the medial and lateral menisci appear as low signal bow-tie-shaped structures between the femoral condyles and tibial plateaux.
As the normal meniscus laterally measures 9-12 mm in width, it should be seen on a number of adjacent images (2-3 images if imaged with 3 mm thick slices with a 1 mm skip).An absent bow tie sign is therefore when less than two sagittal slices demonstrate a normal body of the meniscus, and is indicative of meniscal pathology, including:bucket handle tear with displacement (often with a double PCL sign)flap tear with displacement (i.e. bucket-handle, but the handle at one end has come loose)free fragment with displacement (i.e. bucket-handle, but the handle at both ends has come loose)Other meniscal changes can, however, appear similar, including:prior resection of meniscal teardegenerative maceration of the inner edge of the meniscussmall patients (children / small adults)The presence of too many bow-ties implies a discoid meniscus.

Agenesis of the ductus venosus (ADV) is a rare fetal vascular anomaly.
EpidemiologyPathologyTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAccording to the data obtained from the screening tests performed at 11-14 weeks of pregnancy, its incidence is reported to be 1/2500 12.In a large case series, Acherman et al.
13 defined five drainage patterns in absent ductus venosus:the umbilical vein is connected to the systemic venous circulation through the portal sinusvia an abnormal venous channel from the portal sinus to the right atrium presumably via hepatic sinusoids to the hepatic veinsthe umbilical vein bypasses the portal sinus and the liver and connects to the systemic venous circulation via an abnormal venous channel (case 2)from the umbilical vein to the right atrium, directly or through a dilated coronary sinus: considered the most common type 5 and carries the worst prognosis due to the risk of developing congestive cardiac failure 11from the umbilical vein to the midportion of the inferior vena cava (IVC)from the umbilical vein to the right iliac vein (case 1)via an abnormal venous channel from the portal sinus to the right atrium presumably via hepatic sinusoids to the hepatic veinsfrom the umbilical vein to the right atrium, directly or through a dilated coronary sinus: considered the most common type 5 and carries the worst prognosis due to the risk of developing congestive cardiac failure 11from the umbilical vein to the midportion of the inferior vena cava (IVC)development of hydrops fetalisfetal aneuploidyfocal liver necrosis and calcificationchromosomal anomalies, e.g. Turner syndrome 4non-aneupliod syndromic anomalies, e.g. Noonan syndrome 4non-syndromic anomalies, e.g. congenital cardiac anomalies 7The prognosis of fetuses with absent ductus venosus diagnosed at 11-13 weeks of gestation depends on the measurement of nuchal translucency thickness, being poor if the thickness is increased and good if it is normal 12.

Abscesses are focal confined collections of suppurative inflammatory material and can be thought of as having three components 1:TerminologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyReferencesCases and figuresAbscesses are akin to empyemas, as both are defined inflammatory collections.
The difference is that abscesses occur in the parenchyma of the affected organ while empyemas arise in a pre-existing cavity such as the pleural space.
The presentation of an abscess is varied depending on the location and its infiltration of and mass effect on local structures.
Systemically, patients with abscesses can present with a swinging pyrexia and raised inflammatory markers, which are resistant to antimicrobial therapy.
Pain is a common accompanying symptom.
The hallmark signs of subcutaneous abscesses are pain, warmth, redness, and swelling.
Abscesses can be caused by bacteria, parasites, or fungi.
Essentially any tissue in the body can play host to abscesses.
Please refer to individual articles for further details:Bezold abscessbreast abscessBrodie abscesscerebral abscessliver abscesspulmonary abscessrenal abscessspinal epidural abscesssplenic abscesssubcutaneous abscessTypical radiological appearances are of a central zone of necrotic inflammatory material encapsulated by a discernible wall.
Exact features will vary depending on the tissue or organ within which the abscess is located.
relatively low-attenuation central necrotic componenta well-defined fibrous capsule: can be irregular and thick when compared to the thin smooth wall of a simple cystcapsular ring enhancement with contrast: can be difficult to appreciate when the abscess is contained in a vascular structure like the liver where there is a concurrent parenchymal enhancementsurrounding inflammatory changes (i.e. peritoneal fat stranding)a mass effect with effacement of adjacent structuresThe presence of an abscess in patients presenting with sepsis can be delineated by an indium (In-111) labeled white cell scan, often in the setting of suspected abdominopelvic sepsis.
Tracer accumulates in the region of the abscess, such as the right iliac fossa in an appendiceal abscess.
As abscesses usually have a thick wall with poor vascularity, indium-111 take-up can be a lengthy process and 48-hour delayed images are sometimes required.
The sensitivity of this test is not thought to be affected by the use of concomitant antibiotics or steroids.
Treatment is guided by the size, accessibility, and clinical severity of sepsis in each case.
Although abscesses may be treated medically with antibiotics, they often require percutaneous or surgical drainage.
As abscesses have poor vascularity, high dose oral or parenteral treatment is preferred.
Percutaneous drainage can be performed under ultrasound or CT guidance for abscesses within the thoracic or peritoneal cavity.
Some abscesses will require open incision and drainage.
Abscess is derived from the Greek work aposteme (άπό-ίστημι) meaning "throwing off of bad humors".
The word first appeared in 1543 in a translation of a surgery text: "Aposteme - In latyne it is called abscissus" 3.

Non-visualization of the fetal stomach on ultrasound can occur with various physiological as well as pathological processes.
It becomes a significant sonographic observation >14 weeks of gestation (about the time the fetus begins to swallow).Causes include:physiological emptying: transientlack of amniontic fluid to swallowoligohydramnios and its various causesanhydramnios and its various causesimpaired fetal swallowingcertain forms of esophageal atresia: particularly those without a tracheo-esophageal fistulaobstructing oropharyngeal mass cervical teratomaepignathusCNS abnormalitiesfacial cleftsneuromuscular disordersmicrogastriacongenital diaphragmatic herniation: fetal stomach may be absent in an axial ultrasound scan - standard view due to migration into the thoraxoligohydramnios and its various causesanhydramnios and its various causescertain forms of esophageal atresia: particularly those without a tracheo-esophageal fistulaobstructing oropharyngeal mass cervical teratomaepignathusCNS abnormalitiesfacial cleftsneuromuscular disorderscervical teratomaepignathusIf there is non-visualization of the fetal stomach >18 weeks, there is an 85% chance of an abnormality.non-visualization of the fetal gallbladder on ultrasound (differential)

An absent infrarenal inferior vena cava can be congenital, due to the failure of development of the posterior cardinal and supracardinal veins, or acquired, as a result of intrauterine or perinatal inferior vena cava thrombosis.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIt is an extremely rare anomaly.
The patient may present with symptoms of lower extremity venous insufficiency or idiopathic deep venous thrombosis, particularly in younger patients.
The non-invasive modalities of choice are contrast enhanced CT or MRI, which are preferred to ultrasound.
The gold standard is venography, sometimes performed for surgical planning.
General features include:absent infrarenal inferior vena cava with preservation of the suprarenal segmentcommon iliac veins may be absentexternal and internal iliac veins drain into the ascending lumbar veins, which drain into the azygos-hemiazygos systemcollateral paraspinal circulation may be present

In a fetal sonographic assessment, an absent nasal bone is a feature which can sometimes be used as a surrogate marker for fetal aneuploidy.
Radiographic assessmentSignificanceSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIt is assessed on a midline sagittal view.
In this section, the nasal bone is often seen as a bright echogenic line.
It is best visualized at around 11th to 14th weeks of gestation (1st trimester).
A magnified image may assist in visualization.
When the mid sagittal view is difficult to assess, some authors suggest a coronal view of the fetal face to look for paired echogenic structures located at the upper tip of the retronasal triangle 6.
When the nasal bone is absent at 11 to 12 weeks, while the other ultrasound markers and serum biochemistry are normal; a follow up scan after a week is suggested.
The incidence of an absent nasal bone is related to nuchal translucency (NT), crown rump length (CRL), and ethnic origin, as well as aneuploidy.
It is more common with increased NT, smaller CRL measurements and in fetuses of Afro-Caribbean parents.
The reported prevalence range of an absent nasal bone on ultrasound for euploid as well as the following aneuploidic states areeuploid: nasal bone absent in 0.5-3% 1trisomy 21: nasal bone absent in 60-73% 1-3trisomy 18: nasal bone absent in 53-57% 1,3trisomy 13: nasal bone absent in 32-45% 1,3Turner syndrome: nasal bone absent in 9% 3hypoplastic nasal bone

An absent patella is a rare finding and can be found with an equally rare set of associations:surgical removal of patella (patellectomy)nail patella syndrome 2popliteal pterygium syndromeproximal focal femoral deficiency (PFFD)Meier-Gorlin syndrome 3

An absent septum pellucidum may rarely be an isolated finding, or more commonly be seen in association with a variety of conditions.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe septum pellucidum is partly or entirely absent in 2 or 3 individuals per 100,000 in the general population.
An absent septum pellucidum may be developmental or acquired secondary to another pathological process 1,2.
Cavum septum pellucidum is always visualized between 18 and 37 weeks and within a biparietal diameter of 44 to 88 mm.
Failure to detect the cavum septum pellucidum within this time interval requires further investigation.
However, the absence of cavum septum pellucidum on the ultrasound exam prior to 18 weeks or later than 37 weeks is considered a normal finding.isolatedcorpus callosum agenesisholoprosencephalyalobarsemilobarlobarmiddle interhemispheric variantAVID syndromesepto-optic dysplasiaschizencephalyalobarsemilobarlobarmiddle interhemispheric variantcongenital hydrocephalushydranencephalyporencephalyNon-visualization of the septum pellucidum with direct communication of the frontal horns.
Additionally, the following characteristics may be seen 3:boxing/squaring off of the frontal hornsinferior pointing frontal hornsabnormally inferiorly positioned fornix (coronal views)

Absent end-diastolic flow (AEDF) in an umbilical artery Doppler assessment is a useful feature which indicates underlying fetal vascular stress if detected in mid or late pregnancy.
It is often classified as Class II in severity in abnormal umbilical arterial Dopplers 9.PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe presence of absent end-diastolic flow (AEDF) can be normal in early pregnancy (up to 16 weeks).
In mid to late pregnancy it usually occurs as a result of placental insufficiency 7-8.
Flow in the umbilical artery(ies) should be in the forward direction in normal circumstances.
If placental resistance increases, the diastolic flow may reduce, later becoming absent and finally reverses.intra-uterine growth restriction (IUGR)increased risk of neonatal thrombocytopenia 6increased risk of necrotizing enterocolitis1The umbilical arterial velocity is seen reducing to zero at end diastole.
The impedance is found to be highest at the fetal end of the umbilical cord and therefore the absence of end diastolic flow is seen first in this region.
The situation is associated with an increased risk of fetal and neonatal mortality, as well as an increased incidence of long-term permanent neurologic damage 5.Approximately 1/3 of cases may improve with bed rest.
Often it is recommended that close follow-up or expeditious delivery be pursued 7.reversal of umbilical artery end-diastolic flow

An absent thumb can have many associations.
They include:Fanconi anemia (pancytopenia-dysmelia syndrome)Franceschetti syndromeHolt-Oram syndromephocomelia (e.g. thalidomide embryopathy)Poland syndrome (pectoral muscle aplasia and syndactyly)Rothmund-Thomson syndromeSeckel syndrome (bird-headed dwarfism)trisomy 18Yunis-Varón syndromeradial ray anomalies

Absence of the yolk sac in the presence of an embryo on a transvaginal ultrasound is considered abnormal, and in general is associated with subsequent embryonic death.yolk sac

Absorbed dose is a measure of the energy deposited in a medium by ionizing radiation.
It is equal to the energy deposited per unit mass of a medium, and so has the unit joules (J) per kilogram (kg), with the adopted name of gray (Gy) where 1 Gy = 1 J.kg-1.The absorbed dose is not a good indicator of the likely biological effect.
1 Gy of alpha radiation would be much more biologically damaging than 1 Gy of photon radiation for example.
Appropriate weighting factors can be applied reflecting the different relative biological effects to find the equivalent dose.
The risk of stochastic effects due to radiation exposure for the population can be quantified using the effective dose, which is a weighted average of the equivalent dose to each organ depending upon its radiosensitivity.
Other related values include:absorbed dose rate (Gy.s-1): amount of radiation delivered over a time periodrad: the international unit of absorbed dose pre-1980 where 1 Gy = 100 radkerma (Gy): kinetic energy released per unit mass

In ultrasound, absorption is the reduction in intensity of the sound waves as it passes through tissue.
Most of the energy lost is in the form of heat.

Abusive head trauma is a term that is used to related to inflicted head injury that has occurred by either shaking, impact head trauma, or both.
Subdural hemorrhage in a child should be viewed with suspicion.
Most often, the subdural hemorrhages will demonstrate varying ages.
A potential pitfall is interpreting subdural hygroma in a patient with benign enlargement of the subarachnoid spaces (BESS) as suggestive of NAI without other stigmata 9.

Acalculia (or acquired dyscalculia) represents the acquired loss of the ability to perform simple arithmetic tasks secondary to CNS pathology.
It is not to be confused with developmental dyscalculia, which is a different entity and represents developmental disturbance of computational ability.
As computational tasks necessitate an orchestrated interplay between visuospatial, verbal and conceptual cognitive functions, dyscalculias can have significantly variable symptoms.
Impairments in some patients can, for example, solely affect recognition, or production of numbers, or inability to carry out simple arithmetic tasks despite ample knowledge of the principles of arithmetics 1.
Major forms of acalculia:primary acalculia (anarithmetria): inability to understand numerical concepts and to perform basic arithmetic tasksoften occurs in combination with aphasia, alexia, and agraphia 1in the eponymous Gerstmann syndrome acalculia co-occurs with agraphia, right-left disorientation, and finger agnosia 2 secondary acalculia: impaired computational performance secondary to other cognitive functional damage (memory, language, or visuospatial deficits, etc.)often occurs in combination with aphasia, alexia, and agraphia 1in the eponymous Gerstmann syndrome acalculia co-occurs with agraphia, right-left disorientation, and finger agnosia 2

An acardiac twin, also known a recipient twin, refers to the haemodynamically disadvantaged twin of a twin-pair in the setting of twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence.
The acardiac twin undergoes secondary atrophy and is non-viable.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresComplicationsTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAcardiac twinning is thought to affect 1 in 100 monozygotic twin pregnancies and 1 in 35,000 pregnancies overall 2,3.
There is no recognized familial recurrence.
The acardiac twin undergoes secondary atrophy of the heart and dependent organs (brain) and often develops a characteristic set of anomalies including acardia and acephalus.
This twin exerts abnormal strain on the opposite (pump) twin by stealing its circulation.
There are two schools of thought in the pathogenesis of acardiac twins:some propose that the primary defect is one of cardiac embryogenesis (dysmorphogenesis) others consider the primary cause being an abnormal vascular communication between embryos in the placenta with arterial to arterial communication leading to reversed flow of blood to the haemodynamically disadvantaged or recipient twin, with resulting secondary atrophy of the heart and dependent organs 5An acardiac twin can present with four morphological types:acardius anephusmost common type there is an absence of the head and upper torso and limbs in the acardiac twin with preservation of the lower limbs, genitalia and abdominal visceraacardius ancepsmost developed typerudimentary cranial structures present with otherwise persistent trunk, limbs and organshowever lacks even a rudimentary heart acardius amorphusleast differentiated type comprises of an amorphous mass of bone, muscle, fat and connective tissueif rudimentary nerve tissue is present, it is then called acardius myelantencephalusacardius acormusrarest typethe only developed structure is the fetal head all other structures are essentially absentthe umbilical cord insertion is directly into the fetal headpathologically, rudiments of thoracic structures may be presentmost common type there is an absence of the head and upper torso and limbs in the acardiac twin with preservation of the lower limbs, genitalia and abdominal visceramost developed typerudimentary cranial structures present with otherwise persistent trunk, limbs and organshowever lacks even a rudimentary heart least differentiated type comprises of an amorphous mass of bone, muscle, fat and connective tissueif rudimentary nerve tissue is present, it is then called acardius myelantencephalusrarest typethe only developed structure is the fetal head all other structures are essentially absentthe umbilical cord insertion is directly into the fetal headpathologically, rudiments of thoracic structures may be presentsingle umbilical artery: ~66% 2underlying chromosomal anomaly: ~33% 2While features can vary with each subtype, general features includefetal biometric discordance marked edema (fetal anasarca) of the affected twin with cystic changesnormal or accelerated growth of the lower extremities due to an imbalance in the interfetal circulation.
retrograde supply of the desaturated blood to the upper body and head leads to maldevelopment of the heart, head, and upper torso, which are completely absent or severely deficientthe umbilical cord to the acardiac twin is often quite short and may be difficult to identifyShows reversed flow through the umbilical arteries to the affected fetus.
The other donor (pump) twin may develop cardiac failure (hydrops) with a reported mortality of 50-75%.The acardiac twin is non-viable and management is aimed at maintaining the viability of the other (donor/pump) twin, including close surveillance for development of hydrops.
Interrupting blood flow to the acardiac twin may be performed by various methods which include hysterotomy and removal of the acardiac twin, ligation of the umbilical cord and/or laser ablation of vessels.

Acardius acormus is a morphologic subtype of an acardiac twin in a twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence.
This entity is the least common of the four subtypes, comprising of cephalic structures only.
It is seen in approximately 5% of cases.

Acardius amorphus is a morphologic subtype of the acardiac twin in a twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence.
This entity is the least well differentiated of the four subtypes, comprising of an amorphus mass with no recognizable structures.
It is seen in approximately 20% of cases.

Acardius anceps is a morphologic subtype of the acardiac twin in a twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence.
This entity is the most well differentiated of the four subtypes, with a partly formed head, thorax, and abdomen.
It is seen in approximately 10% of cases.

Acardius anephus is a morphologic subtype of an acardiac twin in the twin reversed arterial perfusion (TRAP) sequence.
In this entity, no cephalic or structures are present, but the lower limbs are preserved.
This is the most common subtype, seen in 60-75% of cases1.

ACC/AHA classification of coronary lesions is a system use to classify coronary arterial calcific plaque burden.
It is classified astype Adiscrete (< 10 mm)concentric nonangulated segment < 45ºsmooth contourlittle or no calcificationless than totally occlusivenot ostial in locationno major branch involvementasbsence of thrombustype Btubular (10-20 mm)eccentricmoderate tortuosity of proximal segmentmoderately angulated, 45-90ºirregular contourmoderate to heavy calcificationostial in locationbifurcation lesions requiring double guidewiressome thrombus presentthis can be sub classified into two sub categoriestype B1: having one of the above characteristicstype B2: having two or more of the above characteristicstype Cdiffuseexcessive tortuosity of proximal segmentextremely angulated, > 90ºinability to protect major side branchdegenerated vein graft with friable lesionsdiscrete (< 10 mm)concentric nonangulated segment < 45ºsmooth contourlittle or no calcificationless than totally occlusivenot ostial in locationno major branch involvementasbsence of thrombustubular (10-20 mm)eccentricmoderate tortuosity of proximal segmentmoderately angulated, 45-90ºirregular contourmoderate to heavy calcificationostial in locationbifurcation lesions requiring double guidewiressome thrombus presentthis can be sub classified into two sub categoriestype B1: having one of the above characteristicstype B2: having two or more of the above characteristicstype B1: having one of the above characteristicstype B2: having two or more of the above characteristicsdiffuseexcessive tortuosity of proximal segmentextremely angulated, > 90ºinability to protect major side branchdegenerated vein graft with friable lesionscoronary artery diseaseCoronary Artery Disease - Reporting and Data System

There are a number of accepted abbreviations that we use on Radiopaedia.org.
We would like the site to be as standardized as possible and we have therefore chosen our accepted abbreviations and would ask that where possible these are used:a.k.a.
not aka (short for "also known as")cf.
not c.f. (
short for "confer", meaning "compare")e.g.
not eg./e.g/eg (short for "exempli gratia", meaning "for example")et al.
not et al or et.
al. (
short for "et alii", meaning "and others")etc.
not etc, &c. (short for "et cetera", meaning "and so on")if etc.
appears at the end of a sentence only a single full-stop is needed, i.e. etc.,
not etc..fl.
for years known to be alive/active (short for "floruit", meaning "flourished")see biographical articlesi.e.
not ie./i.e/ie (short for "id est", meaning "that is")NB not n.b. (
short for "nota bene", meaning "note well")vs not vs. (meaning "versus")x-ray not X-ray or xray or XRAY or any other wacky combinationX-ray is allowable when it forms the first word in a sentence or a title or is within the title of a referenced articleif etc.
appears at the end of a sentence only a single full-stop is needed, i.e. etc.,
not etc..see biographical articlesX-ray is allowable when it forms the first word in a sentence or a title or is within the title of a referenced articleAs a general note on abbreviations, please do not use abbreviations that are not widely known and used (convenience acronyms), e.g. UE for "uremic encephalopathy".
There is no need to do this, as we don't need to worry about word length or count (as in journal articles).
Read more about this: How to use acronyms.
using e.g.e.g.
vs i.e.

An accessory abductor digiti minimi (ADM) muscle is the commonest accessory muscle of the hypothenar eminence, found in 24% individuals.
When present it is one of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.origin:antebrachial fascia passing anteriorly to Guyon canaloccasionally arises from the palmaris longus tendoninsertion: abductor digiti minimi (ADM) muscleor an insertion discrete from the ADM proper, into medial aspect of the base of the proximal phalanxarterial supply: ulnar arteryinnervation: deep branch of ulnar nerveaction: flexion of the 5th metacarpophalangeal jointantebrachial fascia passing anteriorly to Guyon canaloccasionally arises from the palmaris longus tendonor an insertion discrete from the ADM proper, into medial aspect of the base of the proximal phalanx

The accessory anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (accessory AITFL), also known as Bassett's ligament, is an anatomical variant present in many ankles.
Pathological thickening of the accessory ligament is seen in the setting of inversion injury that causing the pain due to mild anterior instability and anterior impingement 1.The accessory anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament is a distal separate fascicle located parallel and just distal to the anterior inferior tibiofibular ligament (AITFL), also attaching to the tibia and fibula.
Variations in the length, width, and obliquity course of the Bassett’s ligament may cause in pathology.
Wider and longer fascicles, as well as fibular attachment far from the joint level, are the factors that potentially increased the risk.
Anterior and anterolateral talar dome chondral abrasion is associated with pathologic accessory AITFL.Moreover, the presence of abnormally thickened Bassett’s ligament is related to the superolateral talar dome lesion that resulting in the cartilage abrasion.

The accessory appendicular artery, also known as the artery of Seshachalam, is a branch of the posterior cecal artery.
It arises from the ileocolic artery, and runs in the mesoappendix.
The exact prevalence of this accessory artery and its impact upon the risk of appendicitis varies among studies.
Accessory appendiceal arteries were described as early as 1905 3,4.
A prominent Indian surgeon, T Sheshachalam, also described the appendiceal vascularization, including accessory appendiceal arteries, in 1930 5, and so the vessel sometimes bears his name (anecdotally it is most commonly found in the Indian medical literature).

Accessory breast tissue is a relatively common congenital condition in which abnormal accessory breast tissue is seen in addition to the presence of normal breast tissue.
This normal variant can present as a mass anywhere along the course of the embryologic mammary streak (axilla to the inguinal region).Common locationsEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figureschest wallvulvaaxillakneelateral thighbuttockfaceearneckFound in 2-6% of women and 1-3% of males 5.
Although present from birth, patients are often not aware of it until puberty.
Most women are unaware of their accessory breast tissue and it is detected incidentally on a mammogram.
Discomfort, pain, milk secretion, axillary thickening, and local skin irritation can occur.
Accessory breast tissue responds to hormonal stimulation and may become more evident during menarche, pregnancy, or lactation.
On examination, supranumerary nipples may also be seen.
This tissue ranges from a small focus of parenchyma to complete structures (which may include nipple and areola).It is also important to remember that both benign and malignant diseases of breast tissue in ectopic locations in adult women have been described.
Accessory breast tissue can be found anywhere along the thoracoabdominal region of the milk line (the embryologic mammary streak) but are most frequently found in the axilla and may occur bilaterally.
They are very rarely seen in the face, back, and thigh.
Various disorders associated with supernumerary nipples include:urogenital defectsvertebral abnormalitieshypertrophic pyloric stenosistesticular canceraberrant ventricular conductionMost accessory breast tissue is found coincidentally on routine screening mammography.
Ultrasound imaging shows breast tissue, indistinguishable from regular breast.
Occasionally performed in challenging atypical cases but in practice this is rarely needed.
The signal and enhancement characteristics are similar to normal glandular tissue.
No treatment is required in the vast majority of cases.
The treatment of choice for symptomatic accessory axillary breast tissue is surgical excision as removal of the tissue will relieve physical discomfort or mechanical discomfort in the case of large volume accessory tissue.
In common with regular breast tissue, accessory mammary tissue may exhibit malignancy, fibroadenoma, mastitis, and fibrocystic change.
The ectopic breast tissue has been found to have a higher propensity to develop malignancy and occurs at an earlier age.
Excessive breast growth (macromastia) can be seen in pregnancy as well as during adolescence.

Accessory fissures of the lung usually occur at the borders of bronchopulmonary segments.
They are common normal variants but are less commonly seen on imaging.
Some of the more common accessory fissure include 1:azygos fissure: most commonly seen accessory fissureinferior accessory fissuresuperior accessory fissureleft horizontal fissureGeneral imaging differential considerations include:fibrotic bands in lung

The accessory flexor digitorum longus muscle is an accessory muscle in the deep posterior compartment of the leg with a reported prevalence of 6-8%.
Unilateral muscles are more common although bilateral cases have been reported.
SummaryGross anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesorigin: variable; either the medial margin of the tibia and deep posterior compartment fascia; or the fibula1,3insertion: variable; either the quadratus plantae, tendon of flexor digitorum longus or both 1,3The accessory flexor digitorum longus muscle arises from the medial margin of the tibia and the deep posterior compartment fascia or from the fibula.
Its insertion may occur into the quadratus plantae muscle, tendon of flexor digitorum longus or both.
The accessory flexor digitorum longus muscle may compress the neurovascular bundle within the tarsal tunnel and cause tarsal tunnel syndrome 1,3.
The accessory flexor digitorum longus muscle has also been reported to contribute to the development of flexor hallucis longus tenosynovitis 4.

Accessory gallbladders are a rare anatomical variant occurring in 0.03% of cases (approximately 1 in 3000 people).
They can arise from either the left or right hepatic ducts or both.
Accessory gallbladders arise from a bifid diverticulum of the hepatic duct in the 5th or 6th week of development 1.
Accessory gallbladders are associated with higher incidence of pathologies.

The accessory (or superior) hemiazygos vein forms part of the azygos system and along with the hemiazygos vein, it is partially analogous to the right-sided azygos vein.
It drains the left superior hemithorax.
TerminologyGross anatomyVariant anatomyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresSpelling it "hemiazygous" when referring to the vein is incorrect, regardless of whether British or American English 5.
In the context of anatomy, see Terminologia Anatomica, hemiazygos vein is the sole correct spelling.
The accessory hemiazygos vein is formed by the confluence of the middle left posterior intercostal veins.
It descends to the left of midline, adjacent to the thoracic vertebrae and crosses posteriorly to the aorta at the level of T7-8 to drain into the azygos vein.
It normally anastomoses with the left superior intercostal vein.left 4th-8th posterior intercostal veinsleft bronchial veins (variable)drains via a common trunk with the hemiazygos vein into the azygos veinforms a common trunk with the hemiazygos vein that passes anterior to the aorta called the interazygos vein 2drains directly into the left brachiocephalic vein (rare) 2

An accessory left atrial appendage is a frequent fortuitous finding in cardiac imaging, encountered in ~10% of patients.
They are more often seen as a small diverticular structure projecting from the right upper side of the left atrial wall.it must not be confused with interatrial septal aneurysmalso consider a left atrial diverticulum

Accessory maxillary ostia are a common anatomic variant, and are usually found incidentally on CT scans of the paranasal sinuses.
Accessory ostia of the maxillary sinus are common, occurring in up to 40% patients 1.
No significant association has been found between the presence of accessory ostia and symptomatic chronic rhinosinusitis or pathological mucosal thickening of the maxillary antra.

The accessory meningeal artery is a branch of the maxillary artery but can also branch from the middle meningeal artery.
The artery passes upwards through the foramen ovale to supply the trigeminal ganglion and the dura mater of Meckel cave and the middle cranial fossa.
It also usually supplies the medial and superior head of the lateral pterygoid muscle.
During its course it is closely related to the tensor and levator veli palatini muscles and runs deep to the mandibular nerve.

The accessory middle cerebral artery is a variant of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) that arises from the anterior cerebral artery (ACA).
It is different from a duplicated middle cerebral artery, in which the duplicated vessel originates also from the distal end of the internal carotid artery (ICA).EpidemiologyGross anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe prevalence of accessory MCA is ~2%.
It runs parallel to the course of the MCA and supplies some of the MCA territory.
The accessory MCA typically supplies anterior frontal lobe (as in this case).Accessory MCA may arise from either the proximal or distal portion of the A1 segment of the ACA.
There are classification systems  (Teal and Manelfe) which reflect this.
Other common embryological variants of the MCA include duplicated middle cerebral artery (vessel arising from the ICA bifurcation, and typically supplying the anterior temporal lobe), and fenestrated middle cerebral artery.
Accessory MCA may be present due to the persistence of two perforators.
Early suggestions that the anomaly arises from a hypertrophied recurrent artery of Heubner (RAH) are now thought unlikely, as RAH often coexists, and the territory of supply is different.
The vessel may be an anomalous early branch of the MCA.There is an association between MCA variants and intracranial aneurysms.
It is important to accurately document MCA anomalies as they have implications for operative or endovascular management.

Accessory muscles are a form of anatomic variation that refers to supplementary discrete muscles that are found alongside the normal expected musculature.
They have been described in the neck, pelvis, upper and lower limbs.

Accessory navicular syndrome occurs when a type II accessory navicular becomes painful due to movement across the pseudo-joint between the ossicle and the navicular bone.
It can be inferred on musculoskeletal ultrasound if a patient's pain is located at a type II accessory navicular and the patient is tender to transducer pressure.
Ultrasound can also be useful to compare with the contralateral side.
The syndrome presents on MRI with bone marrow edema signal (hypointense T1, hyperintense T2/STIR) in both the accessory ossicle and navicular.

An accessory navicular is a large accessory ossicle that can be present adjacent to the medial side of the navicular bone.
The tibialis posterior tendon often inserts with a broad attachment into the ossicle.
Most cases are asymptomatic but in a small proportion it may cause painful tendinosis due to traction between the ossicle and the navicular.
Such changes are best seen on MRI.EpidemiologyClinical presentationGross anatomyClassificationRadiographic features Treatment and prognosisHistory and etymologySee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresan accessory navicular bone is present in ~10% (range 4-21%) of the populationfirst appears in adolescencemore common in female patientsreported bilateral prevalence is ~70% (range 50-90%)Most of the time it is asymptomatic and found incidentally on radiographs, although medial side foot pain (os naviculare syndrome) is the most common presenting feature of accessory navicular bone.
The pain is aggravated by walking, running and weight-bearing activities.
When large, it can protrude medially and cause friction against footwear.
An accessory navicular bone is located posterior to the posteromedial tuberosity of the tarsal navicular bone.
This classification was proposed by Geist 7 in 1914 and at the time of writing (July 2016) remains the most widely used classification system.
The Geist classification divides these into three types:2-3 mm sesamoid bone embedded within the distal portion of the posterior tibial tendonno cartilaginous connection to the naviculam tuberosity and may be separated from it by up to 5 mmaccounts for 30% of accessory navicular bonesusually asymptomaticaccounts for ~55% (range 50-60%) of all accessory navicular bonestriangular or heart-shapedtypically measures around 12 mmconnected to the navicular tuberosity by a 1-2 mm thick layer of either fibrocartilage or hyaline cartilageeventual osseous fusion to the navicular tuberosity may take placean especially prominent navicular tuberosity called a cornuate navicularthought to represent a fused type 2 and is occasionally symptomatic as a result of painful bunion formation over the bony protuberanceRadiographs show a medial navicular eminence that is best visualized on the lateral-oblique view.
Symptomatic accessory navicular bones may appear as a 'hot spot' on bone scan and on MRI bone marrow edema can be seen.
Acute pain can be managed can be achieved by corticosteroid injection and immobilization of the foot for 2-3 weeks.
For refractory cases, surgical management can be considered.
It is thought to have been first described by Bauhin in 1605 6.accessory ossicles

The accessory ossicle of the anterior arch of the atlas is a normal variant and is best appreciated on a lateral cervical/sagittal study.
It is observed as a circular and corticated osseous density that articulates with the inferior aspect of the anterior arch of the atlas.
It is not associated with patient symptomatology.
Historical and clinical correlation of injury or other disease states may reveal the other differential considerations as possibilities if radiographic findings are nonspecific.
calcific tendinitis (HADD) of the longus colli insertion (generally more homogeneously dense without a visible cortical rim)heterotopic ossificationcalcification of the anterior longitudinal ligament (also more homogeneous and  generally more linear)

Accessory ossicles of the feet are common developmental variants with almost 40 having been described.
Some of the more common include 1-4:os peroneumos subfibulareos subtibialeos tibiale externum (accessory navicular)os trigonumos calcaneus secundarisos intermetatarseumpars peronea metatarsalis primi (pars peronea metatarsalia)os supratalarebipartite hallux sesamoidos supranaviculareos infranaviculare (cuneonavicular ossicle) 5Knowledge of their presence is helpful so that they are not misdiagnosed as fractures.

Accessory ossicles of the wrist can be easily recalled with the mnemonic:LOTTEO 1HOTELSL: lunulaO: os styloideum (carpal boss)T: (os) triangulareT: (os) trapezium secondariumE: (os) epilunateO: os hamuli propriumH: (os) hamuli propriumO: os triangulareT: (os) trapezium secondariumE: (os) epilunateL: lunula S: (os) styloideum (carpal boss)

There are numerous named and unnamed accessory ossicles of the lower limb.
These include:ossicles of the hipos acetabuliossicles of the kneeos fabellacyamellaossicles of the footos peroneumos subfibulareos subtibialeos tibiale externumos trigonumos calcaneus secundarisos intermetatarseumos supratalarehallux sesamoidmultipartite hallux sesamoidos supranaviculareos vesalianumos acetabulios fabellacyamellaos peroneumos subfibulareos subtibialeos tibiale externumos trigonumos calcaneus secundarisos intermetatarseumos supratalarehallux sesamoidmultipartite hallux sesamoidos supranaviculareos vesalianummultipartite hallux sesamoidAlthough accessory ossicles are often reported as 'normal anatomic variants' (or similar) it is important to recognize that they are not always just an incidental pick-up but may be the source of the patient's symptoms.sesamoids

Accessory ossicles of the wrist are commonly seen on plain radiographs of the wrist and associated cross-sectional imaging.
Over 20 were originally described 2, although the more common include 1:lunula: between TFCC and triquetrumos styloideum (carpal boss): on dorsal surface of 2nd or 3rd metacarpal basesos triangulare: just distal to ulnar foveatrapezium secondarium: medial to tubercle of trapezium on volar surfaceos epilunate: dorsal to lunateos hamuli proprium: at tip of hamate hookA handy mnemonic is LOTTEO.The full list 2 can be broadly split into three groups: those around the carpometacarpal joints, those around the scaphoid and those around the lunate.
The distal row, from ulnar margin to radial margin are:os vesalianum (hand)os ulnare externumos hamuli propriumsecondary capitategruber ossicleos styloideumsecondary trapezoidtrapezium secondariumos paratrapeziumThe ossicles that surround the scaphoid (starting at the radioscaphoid joint and working anti-clockwise):paranavicularos radiostyloideum (persistent radial styloid)os radiale externumepitrapeziumos centrale carpiThe ossicles that surround the lunate (starting at the scapholunate joint and working anti-clockwise):os hypolunatumos epilunatumepipyramisaccessory bone between lunate and triquetrumlunulaos triangularepersistent ulnar styloidsmall bony element at the radioulnar joint

Accessory ossicles are secondary ossification centers that remain separate from the adjacent bone.
They are usually round or ovoid in shape, occur in typical locations and have well defined smooth cortical margins on all sides.
In most cases, they are congenital in origin, although they may occur as a result of trauma or local degenerative disease 2.The significance of accessory ossicles is their potential to mimic avulsion fractures.shoulder and elbowos acromialeos supratrochleare dorsalewrist (mnemonic)os styloideumos hamuli propriumlunulaos triangularetrapezium secondariumepilunatespineaccessory ossicle of the anterior arch of the atlasOppenheimer ossicleos odontoideumnuchal ligament sesamoid ossiclehip and kneeos acetabulios fabellacyamellameniscus ossiclefoot (mnemonic)os peroneumos subfibulareos subtibialeos tibiale externumos trigonumos calcaneus secundarisos intermetatarseumos supratalaremultipartite hallux sesamoidos supranaviculareos vesalianumos acromialeos supratrochleare dorsaleos styloideumos hamuli propriumlunulaos triangularetrapezium secondariumepilunateaccessory ossicle of the anterior arch of the atlasOppenheimer ossicleos odontoideumnuchal ligament sesamoid ossicleos acetabulios fabellacyamellameniscus ossicleos peroneumos subfibulareos subtibialeos tibiale externumos trigonumos calcaneus secundarisos intermetatarseumos supratalaremultipartite hallux sesamoidos supranaviculareos vesalianum

Accessory parotid glands are a normal variant and represent ectopic salivary tissue separate from, but usually in close proximity to, the main parotid glands.
EpidemiologyGross anatomyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAccessory parotid glands are commonly picked up incidentally on ultrasound; seen in ~20% of the general population 2.Located on the lateral aspect of the masseter muscle, anterior to the main parotid gland, usually superior (occasionally anterior) to the main parotid duct (Stensen duct) 2,3.
They are, on average, within 6 mm of the main parotid gland 8.
Accessory parotid glands have their own blood supply and secondary duct emptying into the main parotid duct 4.Accessory parotid glands have the same US echotexture, CT density and MRI signal as the main parotid glands.facial process of the parotid gland 8Any disorder that affects the main parotid gland may also affect the accessory parotid tissue, but tumors of the accessory parotid glands are rare 5,6.

Accessory peroneal muscles are a group of accessory muscles that can occur in the foot region as a normal variant in some individuals.
The peroneal compartment is known as the lateral compartment of the leg.
Originally, several accessory muscles were distinguished in the peroneal compartment:peroneus quartus (PQ) (Otto)peroneus-calcaneus externum (Hecker)peroneus accessorius (White)peroneus digiti quinti (Testut)This terminology has been simplified by summarizing all peroneal compartment variants under the definition of a peroneus quartus muscle as a muscle arising from the lower leg and inserting onto the lateral hind and midfoot.
This explains the variable insertion sites of the PQ muscle:the retrotrochlear eminence of the calcaneusthe metatarsal bone of the 5th toethe peroneal tendonsthe lateral retinaculum of the anklethe cuboid boneThe origin of the PQ muscle is the distal lateral portion of the fibula.
It typically descends medial and posterior to the peroneal tendons.
The PQ muscle is usually asymptomatic.
Occasionally, it may lead to crowding in the retromalleolar groove, predisposing to peroneus brevis tendon attrition and tear.
The peroneus tertius muscle is not a lateral (peroneal) compartment muscle, as it runs in the same compartment as the extensor digitorum longus, that is the anterior compartment of the leg.
It arises from the lower third of the anterior surface of the fibula and the interosseous membrane and from an intermuscular septum connecting it with the peroneus brevis muscle (septum of Otto).
Its tendon passes under the superior and inferior extensor retinacula of the ankle and inserts into the dorsal surface of the base of the 5th metatarsal bone.
It is a simple variant with no associated pathologies.

The accessory phrenic nerve is an anatomical variant seen in a little over one third of patients (36%).
It most commonly arises from the ansa cervicalis, or slightly less commonly, the subclavian nerve.
It is unknown as to how much the accessory phrenic nerve contributes to diaphragmatic function in these individuals.
The accessory phrenic nerve most commonly arises from the ansa cervicalis (45%) or the subclavian nerve (43%).Rarely, it has also been seen to arise from the C3, C4 or C5 nerve roots, supraclavicular nerve, spinal accessary nerve, nerve to sternohyoid muscle or hypoglossal nerve.
The accessory phrenic nerve most commonly joins with the phrenic nerve within the thorax (two-thirds) with the other third being within the neck at various locations.

Accessory renal arteries are a common variant and are present in ~25% (range 20-30%) and are bilateral in ~10% of the population 7.
Their proper identification is of utmost importance for surgical planning prior to live donor transplantation 2,3 and renal artery embolization for various reasons 5.The term extra renal artery may be used 4, with a subclassification into:aberrant renal artery: supplying the superior and/or inferior pole of the kidneyaccessory renal artery: supplying the renal hilumAccessory renal arteries occur bilaterally in 10-15% of cases:single renal artery arising from the abdominal aorta: 70%double renal arteries: ~20% (range 14-23%)triple renal arteries: ~2.5% (range 1-4%)quadruple renal arteries:  <1%Most commonly accessory renal arteries arise from the abdominal aorta and supply the inferior pole of the kidney, although rarely they can arise from:celiac trunksuperior and inferior mesenteric arteriesmiddle colic arterymiddle sacral arteryThe first recorded case of multiple renal arteries was described by Eustachius in 1552 1.

An accessory right inferior hepatic vein is the most common variation of the hepatic veins.
It is present in up to 48% of the population and drains the posterior part of the right lobe (mainly segments 6 and 7) directly into the inferior vena cava.
Variations in hepatic vascular anatomy are particularly important in the setting of liver surgery, transplantation and radiological intervention.

Accessory sacroiliac joints are a common finding, present on ~15% (range 13-17.5%) of CT studies, and may be unilateral or bilateral.
They are an articulation between the medial aspect of the posterior superior iliac spine and the sacrum just lateral to the second dorsal sacral foramen.
They may be congenital (diarthrodial joint) or more commonly acquired (fibrocartilaginous joint) in origin.

The accessory semimembranosus muscle is a rare accessory muscle of the posterior compartment of the thigh.
It arises from the distal aspect of the semimembranosus muscle belly and courses through the popliteal fossa between it and the semitendinosus muscle medially and the biceps femoris laterally.
It does not have an osseous insertion, instead attaching to the proximal medial head of the gastrocnemius muscle 1.This muscle can be difficult to differentiate from the tensor fasciae suralis 2.

The accessory soleus muscle is an anatomical variant characterized by an additional distinct muscle encountered along a normal soleus muscle.
It is uncommon with a prevalence of ~3% (range 0.7-5.5%).SummaryGross anatomyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresorigin: fibula, soleal line of the tibia, or the anterior surface of the soleus muscleinsertion:  calcaneus, at either the upper surface or the medial cortexinto the Achilles tendon distallyfleshy insertion into the upper surface of the calcaneusfleshy insertion into the medial cortex of the calcaneustendinous insertion into the upper calcaneal surfacetendinous insertion into the medial surface of the calcaneusarterial supply: posterior tibial arteryinnervation: tibial nerveinto the Achilles tendon distallyfleshy insertion into the upper surface of the calcaneusfleshy insertion into the medial cortex of the calcaneustendinous insertion into the upper calcaneal surfacetendinous insertion into the medial surface of the calcaneusThe accessory soleus muscle arises from the deep surface of the soleus or from the fibula and descends anteriorly to the calcaneal (Achilles) tendon.
Its insertion may occur into the calcaneal tendon, the upper surface of the calcaneus, or in the medial aspect of the calcaneus.
Patients with an accessory soleus muscle can be asymptomatic and thus it will be detected incidentally during imaging performed for an unrelated reason 4.
If symptomatic, the usual presentation is a soft mass in the posteromedial distal third of leg 5.
This mass increases in size with activity, particularly plantar flexion 5,6,7.
Pain is another common symptom (2/3rds of patients) and it worsens with jumping and running 5,6,7.
These symptoms are likely due to chronic compartment syndrome as the accessory soleus muscle increases in size during physical activity.
Neuropathy from compression of the posterior tibial nerve has also been reported 8.The Kager fat pad is obliterated by a well-defined area of increased soft-tissue attenuation.
MRI is considered the most specific and sensitive test for diagnosis.
The accessory soleus muscle appears as an oval or fusiform, well-defined image with its own fascia 7,8,9.
It additionally has normal muscle signal intensity on both T1 and T2 7,8,9.Associated exertional pain can occur, especially in athletes 1.

An accessory superior acetabular notch is a normal variant of the acetabulum, which can be seen on radiographs.
It may lead to diagnostic confusion, especially in younger patients.
appear as bilateral symmetric fluid-filled pits in the roof of the acetabulum with sharp marginssupra-acetabular fossa

The parietal and occipital bones in particular are common regions for accessory sutures because of their multiple ossification centers.
It is important to know these anatomic variations, mainly on the head trauma image studies in children, where it could be difficult to differentiate non-depressed skull fractures from an accessory suture.
Accessory sutures usually:make a "zig-zag" pattern with interdigitationshave sclerotic borders similar to major calvarial suturesare often present on both sides and are fairly symmetric especially in the parietal bonesoccipital accessory sutures can be complex and multiple but are also frequently bilateralSimple non-depressed skull fractures usually:have sharp lucencies with non-sclerotic edgeswiden as they approach the suture or there is associated diastasis of the adjacent synchondrosis or suturecan cross suture lines or extend from one major suture to another (in high impact fractures)have associated soft tissue swelling or hematomaabsence does not exclude a fractureabsence does not exclude a fractureaccessory occipital bone suture

Aceruloplasminemia is an autosomal recessive type of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation and disorder of iron metabolism caused by a mutation in the ceruloplasmin (CP) gene resulting in the production of dysfunctional ceruloplasmin.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesAceruloplasminemia is a very rare disorder, with one Japanese study estimating a prevalence of approximately 1 in 2 million 1.
The disease affects a wide variety of age groups but tends to become symptomatic in adulthood 1.Patients present with a classic triad of clinical features caused by iron accumulation in various organs: neurologic disease: movement disorders, ataxia, eventual cognitive impairment 2-4diabetes mellitus 2-4retinal degeneration: usually visual acuity is not affected but changes can be appreciated on fundoscopy 2-4In addition to this classic triad, most patients also have iron deficiency anemia which may or may not be symptomatic depending on its severity 2-4.Aceruloplasminemia is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by a mutation in the CP gene on the long arm of chromosome 3 resulting in the production of dysfunctional ceruloplasmin 5,6.
Ceruloplasmin normally has a role in oxidising ferrous iron into its ferric form, allowing it to be loaded onto transferrin after being released by ferroportin 5,6.
In patients with aceruloplasminemia, dysfunctional ceruloplasmin results in dysfunctional transport of iron out of cells around the body, causing iron accumulation and subsequent damage within those cells and tissues 5,6.This iron accumulation typically occurs in three locations 5,6:brain: typically in the basal ganglia, but can also occur in the thalamus, cerebral cortex, and cerebellum 5,6pancreas: typically affecting beta islet cells 5,6retina 5,6In addition to these three locations, the liver is also commonly involved asymptomatically, as well as other organs such as the heart or kidneys which are less commonly affected 5,6.In general, radiographic changes are appreciated in the brain and the liver 6-9.CT may reveal abnormal hyperdensities in the liver and brain, typically in the basal ganglia 6.MRI is the modality of choice for evaluating patients with aceruloplasminemia 7-9.
Signal changes are most commonly described in the brain and liver, and include 7-9:T1: hypointense 7-9T2/FLAIR: hypointense 7-9GRE/SWI: hypointense 7-9Being a more sensitive imaging modality compared to CT for this condition, an often more extensive disease is noted, particularly in brain imaging where not only are the basal ganglia involved, but signal changes are also appreciated in the thalamus, cerebral cortex, and cerebellum (especially the dentate nucleus) 7-9.
Treatment is with iron chelation therapy, using agents such as desferrioxamine 10.
These agents have been shown to prevent progression of neurologic clinical features 10.other types of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, such as:pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN): classically has the eye of the tiger sign on T2-weighted imaging 6infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) / atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy (NAD): generally T2 hypointensities are accompanied with diffuse high signal intensity and atrophy of the cerebellar cortex 7neuroferritinopathy: classically has cystic components that appear as hyperintense on T2-weighted images 7multiple system atrophy with prominent Parkinsonian signs (MSA-P): T2-weighted hypointensities tend to be limited to the putamen 6hereditary or secondary hemochromatosis: T2-weighted hypointensities are rarely in the basal ganglia 6Wilson disease: also has decreased serum ceruloplasmin, but T2-weighted hypointensities are rarely seen, and usually, T2-weighted hyperintensities of the basal ganglia are seen instead 6,7superficial siderosis: T2-weighted hypointensities tend to be more marked with a predilection for specific infratentorial areas instead of the basal ganglia 6Huntington disease: T2-weighted hypointensities of the caudate may be seen, but there is also caudate head atrophy 7pantothenate kinase-associated neurodegeneration (PKAN): classically has the eye of the tiger sign on T2-weighted imaging 6infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy (INAD) / atypical neuroaxonal dystrophy (NAD): generally T2 hypointensities are accompanied with diffuse high signal intensity and atrophy of the cerebellar cortex 7neuroferritinopathy: classically has cystic components that appear as hyperintense on T2-weighted images 7

Ace-of-spades sign refers to the pathognomonic configuration of the left ventricle as seen in apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy 1-3.It consists of marked ventricular wall thickening at the apex resulting in cavity narrowing at the apex with a relatively normal appearance of the mid-ventricular to basal wall and cavity.
On a longitudinal view of the left ventricle, this results in an appearance resembling a playing card spade.
It can be demonstrated on echocardiography, ventriculography, and cardiac MRI.

The accordion sign (also known as concertina sign) is seen on CT examinations of the abdomen and refers to the similarity between the thickened edematous wall of pseudomembranous colitis and the folds of an accordion.
This appearance is the result of hyperemic enhancing mucosa stretched over markedly thickened submucosal folds and is also seen when contrast is trapped between edematous haustral folds and pseudomembranes formed on the luminal surface of the colon 2.Although it has been reported to be a specific sign of severe Clostridioides difficile colitis, it has also been described in other forms of non-specific, ischemic, and non-Clostridioides difficile infective colitides 1.

The acetabular angle is a radiographic measurement used when evaluating potential developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH).
It is most useful in patients who have started to ossify the epiphysis since ossification diminishes the usefulness of ultrasound.
The angle is formed by a horizontal line connecting both triradiate cartilages (Hilgenreiner line) and a second line which extends along the acetabular roofs.
In the adult, where the triradiate cartilages are fused and therefore inapparent, the inferior margin of the pelvic teardrop is used instead.
This, of course, shifts the horizontal line inferiorly and changes the value of the angle.
Normal values in childrenNormal values in adultsSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThe acetabular angle using Hilgenreiner's line should be less than 28º at birth.
The angle should become progressively shallower with age, and should measure less than 22º at and beyond 1 year of age.
The normal range is 33º to 38º. Angles above 47º are seen in patients with acetabular dysplasia.
A measurement between 39º and 46º is indeterminate.
Additionally, having the center beam above or below the pubis can alter the measurement due to geometric distortion.
However, a 5 cm error in beam alignment only changes the measurement by 4º. This does highlight that these measurements should not be performed on an abdominal radiograph.neuromuscular disordersdevelopmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH)Down syndromeachondroplasiabeta anglealpha angleHilgenreiner line

The acetabular foramen is formed by the bony margins of the acetabular notch and completed by the transverse ligament of the hip.
From its margins (both transverse ligament and acetabular notch) arises the ligamentum teres.
Through it pass nutrient vessels to the femoral head epiphysis.

The acetabular fossa, also known as the cotyloid fossa, is the central aspect of the medial wall of the acetabulum that hosts the ligamentum teres and the fibrofatty pulvinar.
It is the nonarticular portion inside the U-shaped labrum that extends to the acetabular notch 1.
The acetabular fossa is approximately 6 mm anterior to the true center of the acetabulum 2.

Acetabular fractures are a pelvic fracture, which may also involve the ilium, ischium, and/or pubis depending on fracture configuration.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAcetabular fractures are uncommon.
The reported incidence is approximately 3 per 100,000 per year.
This study reported a 63% to 37% male to female ratio 1.high-energy trauma: axial loading of the femurfall from heightmotor vehicle collisioncrush injurylow-energy trauma with abnormal bone: insufficiency fracturefall from heightmotor vehicle collisioncrush injuryThe Judet and Letournel system for acetabular fractures is the most widely used classification system in clinical practice.
It classifies fracture based on oblique pelvic view on plain radiographs.
Additional classification systems include:Orthopedic Trauma Association classification (primarily for research) 3 Harris system (CT imaging based) 4,5Initial assessment is often with a portable AP radiograph of the pelvis in the emergency department.
Assess the following lines:After diagnosis, oblique pelvic views (Judet views) may be used for follow up.
These include:CT has revolutionised the diagnosis, enabling precise delineation of the fracture configuration and assessment of any articular surface disruption.
Many patients with high-energy trauma will have a whole body CT, allowing initial assessment of the femoroacetabular joint as well as any other injuries that are likely to be present, given the typically high energy mechanism of injury 2.For those patients with pelvic insufficiency fractures involving the acetabulum, a standard CT with a bony algorithm may be useful, especially if operative management is under consideration.
A repeat CT after traction is sometimes used to assess response to treatment.analgesiavenous thromboembolism prophylaxistractionskin tractionskeletal tractionnon-operative management 6may be indicated in the setting of minimally displaced fracturemore common in developing countriesopen reduction and internal fixation 7articular incongruence/displaced fracturesignificantly distorted acetabular roof arcentrapped intraarticular fragmentsubluxation of the femoral headskin tractionskeletal tractionmay be indicated in the setting of minimally displaced fracturemore common in developing countriesarticular incongruence/displaced fracturesignificantly distorted acetabular roof arcentrapped intraarticular fragmentsubluxation of the femoral headdeep vein thrombosispost-traumatic osteoarthritisacetabulumfemoroacetabular jointpelvic fractureoblique pelvic views

Acetabular labral calcification in the hip can be a finding detected on imaging studies.
It has an associated with osteoarthritis of the hip and may account for higher pain levels in individuals with a high degrees of calcification independent of age and histological degeneration 2.In some situations consideros acetabulumacetabular labrum

An acetabular labral sulcus is type of normal variant seen as cleft like appearance on imaging.
It forms where the labrum meets the adjacent articular cartilage.
Several sulci can be identified which includeseveral sublabral sulciposterosuperior ~ 48%anterosuperior ~ 44%anteroinferior ~ 4%posteroinferior ~ 4%transverse ligament-labral junction sulcusperilabral sulcusposterosuperior ~ 48%anterosuperior ~ 44%anteroinferior ~ 4%posteroinferior ~ 4%Consideracetabular labral tear: sulci have smooth labral edges, whereas labral tears tend to have irregular edges

Acetabular labral tears, as the name implies, are tears involving the acetabular labrum of the hip.
With the increasing use of hip arthroscopy in orthopedic surgery since the 1970s pathologies of the acetabular labrum as a possible cause of chronic hip and groin pain have become more familiar to a wider medical audience.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresAcetabular labral tears are not infrequent.
They are found in 55% of arthroscopies for intractable hip pain 1.pain on weight-bearing, flexion and internal rotationmicroinstability, painful audible clicking, transient locking, giving way of the hipmismatch between clinical symptoms and radiographic findingsdelayed diagnosislong-standing labral tears contribute to premature osteoarthritis 1,2Major trauma (e.g. hip dislocation) may cause a labral tear.
However, there is no history of previous trauma in most cases.
Structural osseous abnormalities are often found 3,4.cam deformityfemoroacetabular impingementhip dysplasiacapsular laxitycartilage damageparalabral cysts normal appearance in most casesstructural skeletal abnormalitiesosteoarthritis (advanced cases)Labral tears may manifest as abnormal labral morphology, hypoechoic cleft and/or labral detachment from the acetabular rim.
Paralabral cysts may also be visible 7.
may show perilabral cysts or advanced cartilage lesionslabrum integrity can be assessed only in the presence of joint effusionsintrasubstance high T1 or PD signal is not considered as pathologichigh T2 signal may be interpreted as mucoid or cystic degeneration.most accurate imaging study (91vs 36% on native MRI)minimally invasive compared with arthroscopyhighly diluted intra-articular Gd-injection (0.0025 mmol/ml) with joint distension (10-20 ml) allows optimal assessment of the labrum on fatsat T1 sequencestriangular cross-sectionrounded/flattened labral cross-sectionperilabral cleftinsertional cleft on the transverse ligamentcommunicating iliopsoas bursa (15%)absent antero-superior labrumsublabral sulcuslabral tears (marked by intrasubstance contrast entry)longitudinalbucket handleflapradialcleavagelabral detachmentcartilage delaminationloose bodies 1longitudinalbucket handleflapradialcleavagelabral detachmentConservative management consists of activity modification, non-steroidal anti inflammatory medication, physical therapy and intra-articular injections 9.
Acetabular labral tears are the main indication for hip arthroscopy which is gold standard 9.
Partial labrectomy and labral repair are the current surgical options.
Preliminary scientific data suggest that labral repairs can heal and patients can expect both symptomatic and functional improvement.
However, valid prospective studies are needed to determine the long-term outcome of labral repair 5,6.On arthrography for small clefts considerlabral sulci: sulci have smooth labral edges, whereas labral tears tend to have irregular edges

Acetabular labrum acts to deepen the acetabulum and increase contact between the pelvis and the femoral head.
Its exact biomechanical role remains to be fully elucidated.
Gross anatomyRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesThe acetabular labrum is a C-shaped fibrocartilaginous structure with an opening anteroinferiorly at the site of the acetabular notch.
Here it is bridged by the transverse ligament (thus forming the acetabular foramen beneath it).
Elsewhere it is attached to the margins of the acetabulum.
The labrum is thickest posterosuperiorly and widest anterosuperiorly.
It is triangular in cross-section.
The fibrocartilage is arranged in three distinct layers:The capsule of the hip joint attaches to the margins or immediately adjacent to the acetabulum and transverse ligament.
Superiorly the capsule's attachment is removed from the labrum by a few millimeters forming the perilabral sulcus.
Anteriorly and posteriorly the attachment of the capsule is much closer to the base of the labrum, and thus the perilabral sulcus is commensurately smaller.
Radiographically, the labrum is best evaluated with MR arthrography and should appear as a uniformly low signal triangular structure, although signal at the base of the labrum is variable.
Additionally, intrasubstance heterogeneous signal is more frequently seen in older patients.
Labral pathology contributes to hip pain and the development of osteoarthritis of the hip.
Labral lesions are more frequently seen in patients with 'abnormal' hip morphology including:cam-type and pincer type femoroacetabular impingementacetabular dysplasiaacetabular labral calcification

The acetabular notch is a depression in the margin of the acetabulum located anteroinferiorly.
It is bridged by the transverse ligament, and thus forms the acetabular foramen.
The ligamentum teres has part of its origin from the acetabular notch.

The acetabulum (plural: acetabula) is the large cup-shaped cavity on the anterolateral aspect of the pelvis that articulates with the femoral head to form the hip joint.
All three bones of the pelvis (the ilium, ischium, and pubis) together form the acetabulum.
The three bones are initially separated by a Y-shaped triradiate cartilage that begins to fuse after puberty.
The fusion is complete between 20 and 25 years of age 1.The acetabular margin forms three quarters of a circle with a deficiency located anteroinferiorly called the acetabular notch.
This depression is bridged with the transverse ligament of the hip, completing the circle and creating the acetabular foramen.
The acetabular floor has a rough depression called the acetabular fossa that hosts the ligamentum teres.
The acetabular fossa extends superiorly from the acetabular notch.
The bone on the inner surface of the pelvis deep to the acetabular fossa is termed the quadrilateral plate and has clinical importance in classifying acetabular fractures.
The lip-shaped acetabular labrum is a fibrocartilaginous structure attached to the margin of the acetabulum, increasing the acetabular articular area.
As a result, more than half of the femoral head fits within the acetabulum.
The column principle divides the acetabulum into the anterior and posterior columns and becomes important when considering acetabular fractures and their management.
The anterior column is composed of the anterior ilium, anterior wall and dome of the acetabulum, and superior pubic ramus.
The posterior column is composed of the greater and lesser sciatic notches, posterior wall and dome of the acetabulum, and ischial tuberosity.

Achalasia (primary achalasia) is a failure of organized esophageal peristalsis causing impaired relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter, and resulting in food stasis and often marked dilatation of the esophagus.
Obstruction of the distal esophagus from other non-functional etiologies, notably malignancy, may have a similar presentation and have been termed "secondary achalasia" or "pseudoachalasia".
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisPrimary achalasia is most frequently seen in middle and late adulthood (age 30 to 70 years) with no gender predilection 6.
Most cases are idiopathic; however, a similar appearance may occur in Chagas disease.
Authors differ as to whether to reserve the term achalasia for idiopathic cases or to include Chagas disease.
Patients typically present with:dysphagia for both solids and liquids: this is in contradistinction to dysphagia for solids only in cases of esophageal carcinoma 7chest pain/discomforteventual regurgitationSymptoms are initially intermittent.
Patients may also present with complications of long-standing achalasia:esophageal carcinomathe most dreaded complication, seen in ~5%, most often in the mid-esophagusthought to occur because of chronic irritation of the mucosa by stasis of food and secretionsaspiration pneumonia: the chronic presence of fluid debris in the esophagus makes patients very prone to aspirationcandida esophagitisacute airway obstruction: this is a rare complication requiring immediate esophageal decompression with a nasogastric tubethe most dreaded complication, seen in ~5%, most often in the mid-esophagusthought to occur because of chronic irritation of the mucosa by stasis of food and secretionsPeristalsis in the distal smooth muscle segment of the esophagus may be lost due to an abnormality of the Auerbach plexus (responsible for smooth muscle relaxation), resulting in weak, uncoordinated contractions that are non-propulsive.
The abnormality may also occur in the vagus nerve or its dorsal motor nucleus.
The lower esophageal sphincter eventually fails to relax, either partially or completely, with elevated pressures demonstrated manometrically 4.
Early in the course of achalasia, the lower esophageal sphincter tone may be normal or changes may be subtle.
It may be divided into 3 distinct types based on manometric patternstype I (classic) with minimal contractility in the esophageal bodytype II with intermittent periods of pan-esophageal pressurisationtype III (spastic) with premature or spastic distal esophageal contractionsAchalasia characteristically involves a short segment (less than 3.5 cm in length) of the distal esophagus.
Chest radiograph findings include:convex opacity overlapping the right mediastinum.
Occasionally may present as a left convex opacity if the thoracic aorta is tortuous.air-fluid level due to stasis in a thoracic esophagus filled with retained secretions and foodsmall or absent gastric bubbleanterior displacement and bowing of the trachea on the lateral viewpatchy alveolar opacities, usually bilateral, may be seen.
These represent acute pneumonitis or chronic aspiration pneumonia related to dysphagia.
A barium swallow study may be used to confirm esophagus dilatation, in addition to assessing for mucosal abnormalities.
Findings include:bird beak signesophageal dilatationtram track appearance: central longitudinal lucency bounded by barium on both sides 8incomplete lower esophageal sphincter relaxation that is not coordinated with esophageal contractionpooling or stasis of barium in the esophagus when the esophagus has become atonic or non-contractile (a late feature in the disease)uncoordinated, non-propulsive, tertiary contractions (see case 1)failure of normal peristalsis to clear the esophagus of barium when the patient is in the recumbent position, with no primary waves identifiedwhen the barium column is high enough (with the patient standing), the hydrostatic pressure can overcome the lower esophageal sphincter pressure, allowing passage of esophageal contenta hot or carbonated drink during the exam may help visualize sphincter relaxation and barium emptyingPatients with uncomplicated achalasia demonstrate a dilated, thin-walled esophagus filled with fluid/food debris.
Overall, CT has little role in directly assessing patients with achalasia, but is useful in assessing common complications.
Careful assessment of the wall of the esophagus should be undertaken to identify any focal regions of thickening which may indicate malignancy.
The lungs should be inspected for evidence of aspiration.
Treatment is aimed at allowing adequate drainage of the esophagus into the stomach.
Options include 4,5,11:lifestyle changeseating slowly, increasing water intake with meals, avoiding eating near bedtimeavoiding foods that aggravate refluxcalcium channel blockersineffective in the long termmay be used while preparing for definitive treatmentpneumatic dilatationeffective in up 90% of patients3-5% risk of bleeding/perforationbotulinum toxin injectionlasts only ~12 months per treatmentmay scar the submucosa leading to increased risk of perforation during subsequent myotomysurgical myotomy (e.g. Heller myotomy)effective in up to 96% of patientsperoral esophageal myotomy (POEM procedure) is a newer minimally-invasive technique which may be used in select patients10-30% of patients develop gastro-esophageal reflux, and thus it is often combined with a fundoplication (e.g. Dor, Toupet, Nissen)eating slowly, increasing water intake with meals, avoiding eating near bedtimeavoiding foods that aggravate refluxineffective in the long termmay be used while preparing for definitive treatmenteffective in up 90% of patients3-5% risk of bleeding/perforationlasts only ~12 months per treatmentmay scar the submucosa leading to increased risk of perforation during subsequent myotomyeffective in up to 96% of patientsperoral esophageal myotomy (POEM procedure) is a newer minimally-invasive technique which may be used in select patients10-30% of patients develop gastro-esophageal reflux, and thus it is often combined with a fundoplication (e.g. Dor, Toupet, Nissen)There is a variable response to treatment following endoscopic or surgical myotomy based on which achalasia subtype is present 11:type I intermediate prognosis (81%) inversely associated with the degree of esophageal dilatationtype II very favourable prognosis (96%)type III less favourable outcomes (66%)The word achalasia stems from the Ancient Greek term for "does not relax".
A number of entities may mimic achalasia, forming the so-called 'achalasia pattern'.achalasia: the distal segment of narrowing is <3.5 cmcentral and peripheral neuropathyscleroderma: gastro-esophageal junction (GEJ) will be open; less severe dilatationesophageal malignancy or gastric carcinoma: commonly referred to as pseudoachalasiaesophageal strictureChagas diseaseanti-Hu antibodies from lung cancer (paraneoplastic syndrome)Other esophageal disorders should also be considered:non-specific esophageal motility disorderdiffuse esophageal spasmpresbyoesophagus

Acheiria refers to absence of one or both hands and can occur in a number of situations, including:amniotic band syndrome: particularly if unilateralCornelia de Lange syndrome 1fetal hydantoin syndrome 2 Rare defect occurring in 1:65 000 live births.absent thumbradial ray anomalies

Achievements are a recent feature of your public profile.
They are a way of showcasing to the world some of the ways you have contributed to Radiopaedia.
There are 6 achievements currently, two of them representing 'current status' and representing the current level of a specific metric.
indicates whether you are currently a Radiopaedia supporterindicates whether you are currently a member of a verified institutiona level that represents how many public cases you currently havea level that represents how many articles you have createda level that represents how many articles you have editeda level that represents how many edits you have moderatedonly available to members of the editorial boardFor the 4 achievements based on an incremental metric, there is a level that is related to the value of that metric.
Each achievement has 30 levels divided into three groups: bronze (1 - 10), silver (11-20) and gold (21-30).
The relationship between the metric and the level is non-linear.
For example, the number of additional public cases you need to go from level 1 to 2 is far smaller than the number needed to go from level 21 to 22.
Each badge has, at its periphery, ten short incremental segments.
So a bronze badge with 4 segments is equivalent to Level 4, whereas a gold badge with 7 segments represents level 27 and so on.

Achilles tendinopathy refers to a combination of pathological changes affecting the Achilles tendon usually due to overuse and excessive chronic stress upon the tendon.
It can be seen both in athletes and non-athletes.
It is hard to differentiate clinically from a paratendinopathy (which is most common).
It may or may not be associated with an Achilles tendon tear.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIt can affect a range of people from athletes to recreational exercisers and even inactive people.
It affects non-athletes in around one-third of cases.
Macroscopically, tendinopathy results in enlargement, disruption of fibrillar pattern and an increase in tendon vascularity.
Histopathologically, there is evidence of disorganized proliferation of tenocytes, disrupted organization of collagen fibers, and an increase in the noncollagenous matrix, and neovascularization.
Usually, there is no evidence of inflammation, but the cause is thought of as a failed healing response 1.
Repetitive microtrauma from unusual or excessive mechanical loading is deemed to be a causative factor.
It particularly affects the mid and distal portions of the tendon 2.Often shows thickening and rounding of the affected portion of the tendon.
The cutoff value of 1 cm in anteroposterior diameter is usually used for diagnosis.
There is also evidence of neovascularization, which, if present, is usually indicative of a poorer outcome and more severe clinical symptoms.
Additional signs include increased Kager fat pad echogenicity and thickening of a hypoechoic paratenon.
Can show increased intratendinous signal and tendon enlargement, with edema in Kager fat pad in cases of tendinosis.
Achilles tendon ossification

Achilles tendon ossification is an uncommon condition that consists of characteristic bone formation within the substance of the Achilles tendon.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresComplicationsSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAchilles tendon ossification is more common in males 4.
The etiology is unknown but Achilles tendon ossification is seen both with previous macrotrauma of the tendon (e.g Achilles tendon rupture, previous surgery) as well as repetitive microtrauma 1.
There may be a familial or genetic component 3.
It is somewhat more common than dystrophic calcification of the Achilles tendon and may represent a separate entity rather than progression.
It is characterized by mature bone in all of its components (i.e. cortex, trabeculae, and marrow) and can occur within the body of the tendon or at its calcaneal insertion.
An ossified Achilles tendon may fracture.
Differential diagnosisIf present more inferiorly, considerAchilles tendon calcific enthesopathyAchilles tendinopathy

Achilles tendon tears are the most common ankle tendon injuries, and are most commonly seen secondary to sports-related injury, especially squash and basketball.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologySee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThere is strong male over-representation presumably as a result of the predominantly sport related etiology.
Patients are typically aged 30-50 years and have no antecedent history of calf or heel pain.
There are however numerous recognized predisposing factors including:intratendinous steroid injectiondiabetes mellitussystemic inflammatory illnesses rheumatoid arthritis systemic lupus erythematosusrepeated microtraumagoutfluoroquinolone antibioticsochronosis 4hyperparathyroidismrheumatoid arthritis systemic lupus erythematosusTypically patients present with sudden onset of pain and swelling in the Achilles region, often accompanied by an audible snap during forceful dorsiflexion of the foot.
A classic example is that of an unfit 'weekend warrior' playing squash.
If complete a defect may be felt and the patient will have only minimal plantar flexion against resistance.
The spectrum of tears ranges from microtears to interstitial tears (parallel to the long axis of the Achilles), to partial tears, and eventually to complete tears.
Tears can be acute or chronic, with repeated minor trauma.
At the mildest end of the spectrum all that may be present is peritendonitis.
Typically, in a young 'normal' individual, the Achilles tendon ruptures in the 'critical zone', which is a region of relative watershed hypovascularity 2-6 cm proximal to insertion.
The Achilles tendon tear classification is primarily based on the degree of retraction.
Plain radiographs may show soft tissue swelling and obliteration of pre-Achilles fat pad (Kager's triangle).there is often enlargement of the tendon ( >1 cm) with abnormally hypoechoic or anechoic areas within which correspond to the tear and associated adjacent tendinosisoften shows separation of the torn ends with a contour change of the tendonthere is acoustic shadowing at the margins of the tear from sound beam refraction, and adjacent hypoechoic tendinosisAppearances can vary:a full-thickness tear often shows a tendinous gap filled with edema or bloodcomplete rupture shows retraction of tendon endsT2: partial thickness or interstitial tears may show high signal on long TR, and tendon swelling to >7 mm APWhen a plantaris muscle is present then its tendon is usually spared due to its more anterior insertion on the calcaneum (see Case 1)post-operative MR imaging may show a tendon gap although this tends to resolve in around 12 weeks 8post-operatively, Achilles tendon may appear thicker on MR follow up 9Treatment depends on the extent of the tear.
Partial thickness tears can initially be treated conservatively, with surgery reserved for failure of conservative management, on in some cases for high-performance athletes.
Full-thickness tears are normally surgically repaired.
If the patient is not deemed suitable for surgical repair (frail, ill, etc.)
casting of the ankle in the talipes equinus position may be an alternative.
Surgical repair results in a shorter Achilles tendon and better greater calf muscle strength (less soleus atrophy) than non-surgical treatment 10.A true rupture of the Achilles tendon was first described by Ambroise Pare in 1575 and first reported in the medical literature in 1633 3.Haglund syndromecalcaneal tuberosity avulsion fracture is a separate entity.ossification of the Achilles tendon

Achilles tendon thickening can occur for a number of reasons.
The Achilles tendon has an average AP diameter of 6 mm 1.
Thickening of the tendon is when it exceeds 8 mm in AP diameter and can result from:Achilles tendinosis/tearpost-surgical thickeningretrocalcaneal bursitisdegenerationmucoid hypoxic rheumatoid arthritisgouty infiltrationAchilles tendon xanthoma (tends to be nodular and occurs with familial hypercholesterolemia) 2Haglund syndromefluoroquinolone therapyaccessory soleus muscleneoplasms: rare reports of pigmented villonodular synovitis and lymphomamucoid hypoxic

Achilles tendon xanthomas are painless soft tissue masses occurring most commonly at the distal one-third of the tendon and are usually bilateral and symmetrical.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresIt is characterized by localized accumulation of lipid-laden macrophages, inflammatory cells and giant cells secondary to cholesterol deposition in tissue.familial hypercholesterolemiatype 2 and 3 hypoproteinaemiascerebrotendinous xanthomatosissoft tissue densities in the Achilles tendonan AP thickness of the tendon >7 mm in males and >6 mm in femalesloss of normal tendon appearance with multiple hypoechoic foci within the tendon increased AP diameterhyperintense on T1- and T2-weighted imagesloss of the normal anterior concavity of the tendonconvexity of the anterior aspect of the tendonspeckled appearance of the tendonfocal thickening of the tendontophaceous goutchronic tendon degenerationtendinosisinfectionneoplasm

Achondrogenesis type Ia, also known as the Houston-Harris subtype, is a subtype of achondrogenesis.
It is an extremely rare lethal skeletal dysplasia (chondrodysplasia) with a characteristic severe disarrangement of endochondral ossification.
Clinical presentationPathologySee alsoReferencesSome of the common clinical features include:low birth weightskeletal abnormalitiesvery short limbsshort neckincomplete ossification of bones - particularly the skullcongenital cardiac anomaliespatent ductus arteriosusatrial septal defectsventricular septal defectsbreathing problemssmall chestunderdeveloped lungsprotruberant abdomenpatent ductus arteriosusatrial septal defectsventricular septal defectsThe growth plate cartilage completely lacks columnar-zone formation and shows chondrocyte expansion due to intracellular vacuoles.
achondrogenesistype I: type Ia: Houston-Harris sub typetype Ib: Parenti-Fraccaro sub typetype II: Langer-Saldino syndrometype I: type Ia: Houston-Harris sub typetype Ib: Parenti-Fraccaro sub typetype II: Langer-Saldino syndrometype Ia: Houston-Harris sub typetype Ib: Parenti-Fraccaro sub type

Achondrogenesis type Ib, also known as Parenti-Fraccaro subtype, is a subtype of achondrogenesis and is an extremely rare skeletal dysplasia (chondrodysplasia).​​PathologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesUndersulphation has a pronounced effect on the composition of the extracellular matrix of cartilage, and this has been shown by the physical, biochemical, and histological findings.
Histologic findings include rarefied cartilage matrix, loss of normal ground glass appearance of cartilage on HE staining, coarse collagen fibers and collagen rings.
Achondrogenesis 1B is thought to carry an autosomal recessive inheritance.
Point mutations and deletions of the diastrophic dysplasia sulphatase transporter (DTDST) gene it thought to be the underlying factor.
This is located on chromosome 5q and is responsible for sulphate transport.
The mutation results in impaired activity of the sulphate transporter in chondrocytes and fibroblasts and results in the synthesis of proteoglycans which are not sulphated or only insufficiently sulphated (probably by depletion of intracellular sulphate).The fetuses frequently present in breech position.
The physical appearance is strikingly abnormal and characteristics include flat face, narrow thorax with protuberant abdomen, and particularly the severe micromelia with short stubby fingers and toes.
Stillbirth is common.
Features include:severely hypoplastic skeletonthe skull is mildly affected and is slightly less ossified than expected for gestational age, and the orbits may be extended laterally and superiorlyclavicles are short or normal sizethe scapulae are small with irregular contourthe ribs are slightly thinner and much shorter than normal with cupping of distal endsthe iliac bones are smaller than usual and only their upper half is irregularly ossifiedthere is severe shortening and metaphyseal spurring of long bonesulna and fibula are not ossified in most casesshort bones of hands and feet are very poorly ossified and sometimes there is bipartite ossification of medial phalanges can be seenInfants are either stillborn or die shortly after birth.
Genetic counseling and prenatal diagnosis are useful for such cases as this disorder is inherited as autosomal recessive traits.
For a given couple, the chance of future children having the condition is 25%, with a 50% chance of being asymptomatic carriers and 25% chance of being unaffected.

Achondrogenesis refers to a group of rare and extreme skeletal dysplasias.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThe estimated incidence is 1:40,000 with no recognized gender predilection.
It is classified as an osteochondrodysplasia, meaning deficiency of both bone and cartilage development.
There are several recognized subtypes:type 1type 1A: Houston-Harris subtypetype 1B: Parenti-Fraccaro subtypetype 2: Langer-Saldino achondrogenesistype 1A: Houston-Harris subtypetype 1B: Parenti-Fraccaro subtypeMutations in the SLC26A2 and COL2A1 genes cause achondrogenesis types 1B and 2, respectively.
The genetic cause of achondrogenesis type 1A is still unknown.
The patterns of inheritance are autosomal recessive in types 1A and 1B, and autosomal dominant with de-novo mutations in type B.Sonographic diagnosis may be possible after 13 weeks of gestation, where nuchal edema may be evident as an early (though non-specific) sign.
The fetal bony structures are often unable to be identified.
There may also be extreme micromelia 5.
Calvarial ossification may be preserved with the type II subtype which can, in turn, give a floating head appearance.
Additional sonographic findings include:micrognathiamacrocephalyfrontal bossingflat faceanteverted nareslong philtrumnarrow fetal thoraxlung aplasia/hypoplasiarib fractures may be present in type 1AOther ancillary sonographic features that may be present include:polyhydramniosdevelopment of hydrops fetalisThe prognosis is generally poor, with most infants being stillborn or dying soon after birth.
M Fracaro first described a case of achondrogenesis in 1952.General considerations for mild cases include hypochondrogenesis.
For absent calvarial bone(s) (type 1A/1B) on antenatal ultrasound, consider acrania.achondroplasia: a common cause of dwarfism; not to be confused with achondrogenesis

Achondroplasia is a congenital genetic disorder resulting in rhizomelic dwarfism and is the most common skeletal dysplasia.
It has numerous distinctive radiographic features.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIt occurs due to sporadic mutations in the majority of cases but can be inherited as an autosomal dominant condition.
Homozygous achondroplasia is lethal.
There is a prevalence of approximately 1 in 25,000-50,000 births with males affected more frequently than females 18.Achondroplasia is the most common cause of short-limb dwarfism.
Patients are of normal intelligence with normal motor function.
However, they may have specific neurologic deficits.
The disease results from a mutation in the fibroblast growth factor gene 3 (FGFR3) located on chromosome 4p16.3 which causes abnormal cartilage formation.
These are cell surface receptors comprised of an extracellular domain with three immunoglobulin like regions, a transmembrane domain and an intracellular tyrosine kinase 19.
The mutation to the FGFR3 gene in achondroplasia is a gain of function mutation with constitutive activation of an inhibitory signal 19,20.
All bones that form by endochondral ossification are affected.
Bones that form by membranous ossification are not affected, thus allowing the skull vault to develop normally.
SADDAN syndrome: severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricansAlmost all the bones of the skeleton are affected, and hence all parts of the body have bony changes with secondary soft tissue changes.
Antenatally it is difficult to diagnose achondroplastic features until the 3rd trimester 13.Antenatally detectable sonographic features include:short femur length measurement: often well below the 5th centilethe femur length (FL) to biparietal diameter (BPD) is taken as a useful measurementtrident hand 11: 2,3 and 4 fingers appearing separated and similar in lengthseparation of 1st, 2nd, 3rd and 4th fingersprotruding forehead: frontal bossingdepressed nasal bridgethe femur length (FL) to biparietal diameter (BPD) is taken as a useful measurementFeatures on radiographs, CT, and MRI are similar and discussed together here.relatively large cranial vault with small skull basefrontal bossing with the depressed nasal bridge (midfacial retrusion) 19narrowed foramen magnumcervico-medullary kinkrelative elevation of the brainstem resulting in a large suprasellar cistern and vertically-oriented straight sinus communicating hydrocephalus (due to venous obstruction at sigmoid sinus)large anterior fontanelle in infancy, may persist to 5 or 6 years of age 19Also, see the achondroplastic base of skull abnormalities for further discussion.posterior vertebral scallopingprogressive decrease in the interpedicular distance in the lumbar spinegibbus: thoracolumbar kyphosis with bullet-shaped/hypoplastic vertebra (not to be confused with Hurler syndrome)short pedicle canal stenosislaminar thickeningwidening of intervertebral discs 8an increased angle between the sacrum and lumbar spineanterior flaring of the ribs anteroposterior narrowing of the ribshorizontal acetabular roof (decreased acetabular angle)small squared (tombstone or mickey mouse ear) iliac wingssmall trident pelvischampagne glass type pelvic inletshort sacroiliac notchesmetaphyseal flaring 8: can give a trumpet bone type appearancethe femora and humeri are particularly shortened (rhizomelic shortening)long fibula: the fibular head is at the level of the tibial plateau (case 3)bowing to mesial segment of legs 19the limbs may also appear thickened but are in fact normal in absolute terms; thickening is perceived due to reduced lengthtrident handchevron sign 16,17the metacarpal and metatarsal bones, and in some cases the proximal phalanges, are short and of similar lengthThere is often a danger of cervical cord compression due to narrowing of the foramen magnum.
Treatment varies and is usually orthopedic, particularly to correct kyphoscolioses, as well as neurosurgical, to decompress the foramen magnum or shunt hydrocephalus 6-7.Overall prognosis is good, with near-normal life expectancy in heterozygous individuals.
When homozygous, the condition is fatal due to respiratory failure 7.
Achondroplasia literally means "without cartilage formation", although the pathology is impaired endochondral ossification (see Pathology above).The differential diagnosis is that of other less common skeletal dysplasias, including 6:achondrogenesiscampomelic dysplasiathanatophoric dysplasiachondroectodermal dysplasia (Ellis-van Creveld syndrome)causes of limb bowing: general differential for (lower) limb bowing rhizomelic dwarfism: general differential for rhizomelic limb shortening

Achondroplasia is the most common cause of short-limb dwarfism. (
For a general discussion, see the generic article on achondroplasia.)As the skull base forms by endochondral ossification whereas the skull vault by membranous ossification, there is a marked discrepancy in relative size as the skull vault, brain and cord grow normally whereas the skull base remains small.
As a result of this size discrepancy, there is stenosis of the foramen magnum, often with basilar invagination.
Compression of the medulla may result in quadriparesis, sleep apnea, and even sudden death.
Interruption to normal cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) flow can lead to hydrocephalus.
small/non-existent cisterna magnaenlarged suprasellar cistern +/- empty sella due to normal brain and brain stem size but a short clivusenlarged lateral ventriclesenlarged third ventricle+/- enlarged fourth ventricleenlarged CSF space between and over the cerebral hemispheresoccasional transependymal edemamore vertical course of the straight sinusincreased tentorial angle (55-70 degrees)small jugular foramen which can result in elevated venous pressures and reduced flow in the superior sagittal sinus 4foramen magnum narrowedobliteration of the CSF space around the cervicomedullary junctionincreased intramedullary T2 signal sometimes seen, representing myelomalacia and gliosis Surgical decompression may be required, with resection of the posterior aspect of the foramen magnum, the posterior arch of C1 and duroplasty.

Acinar-predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung is a histological subtype of non-mucinous invasive adenocarcinoma of the lung.
In 2011, the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC), American Thoracic Society (ATS), and European Respiratory Society (ERS) 4 introduced a new classification and terminology for adenocarcinoma of the lung, which is now divided into 'preinvasive', 'minimally invasive', and 'invasive'.
The term bronchoalveolar carcinoma (BAC) has been retired, and it is recommended that all invasive adenocarcinomas be classified in terms of the "predominant" comprising histology 4.
Both mucinous and non-mucinous adenocarcinomas typically consist of a mixture of histologic patterns, but reporting of the predominant subtype (lepidic, acinar, papillary, micropapillary, or solid growth) is specifically recommended for non-mucinous lesions, with all mucinous tumors placed in a separate category.
Acinar patterns are thought to have an intermediate prognosis but better than those associated with micropapillary, mucinous/colloid, and solid patterns and worse than those with lepidic predominant patterns 1,3.

Acinic cell carcinoma of the lung (also known as a Fechner tumor) is a type of lung carcinoma of the salivary gland type.
It is extremely rare, especially when it presents in the form of primary acinic cell carcinoma.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesHistologically, they are comprised of clear cells with abundant granular cytoplasm growing as solid sheets with focal acinar, microcystic, and papillocystic regions.
Immunohistochemical stains tend to show strong positivity for:low-molecular-weight cytokeratinsepithelial membrane antigen (EMA)Can be variable, encompassing 1:subpleural nodules in proximity to secondary bronchiendobronchial tumors leading obstructive symptomswell-circumscribed deep parenchymal nodulesAcinic cell carcinoma of the lung tends to have a more indolent behavior and favourable prognosis than other types of lung cancer.acinic cell carcinomaacinic cell carcinoma of the salivary glandsacinic cell carcinoma of the salivary glands

Acinic cell carcinomas of the salivary glands are rare malignant neoplasms that account for 1-3% of all salivary gland tumors.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresPathology may superficially resemble normal serous (acinar) cells of the salivary glands.
It is considered a low-grade, indolent malignancy, but with a tendency to recur after excision 4.The majority arise in the parotid gland (81-98% 3) and they may be bilateral and multicentric.
Imaging findings in acinic cell carcinoma are non-specific and there is an overlap with benign tumors such as Warthin tumor and pleomorphic adenoma 6.non-specific appearancehypoattenuating regions of central necrosisirregular enhancing solid componentnon-specific appearanceT2 hyperintense cystic/necrotic componentsolid component is also mildly T2 hyperintensewell-marginatedirregular solid component that enhances on the postcontrast sequenceFeatures that might suggest malignancy include:lymphadenopathyrapid increase in sizeclinical history of painSurgical excision is considered the standard of care.
Acinic cell carcinomas may recur in up to 35% of patients 5.
Possible differential considerations include:Warthin tumor: much more commonpleomorphic adenoma: much more commonmucoepidermoid carcinoma: more common than acinic celladenoid cystic carcinoma: more common than acinic cellacinic cell carcinomaacinic cell carcinoma of the salivary glandsacinic cell carcinoma of the lungacinic cell carcinoma of the salivary glandsacinic cell carcinoma of the lung

Acoustic enhancement, also called posterior enhancement or enhanced through transmission, refers to the increased echoes deep to structures that transmit sound exceptionally well.
This is characteristic of fluid filled structures such as cysts, the urinary bladder and the gallbladder.
The fluid only attenuates the sound less than the surrounding tissue.
The time gain compensation (TGC) overcompensates through the fluid-filled structure causing deeper tissues to be brighter.
Simply it is seen as increased echogenicity (whiteness) posterior to cystic area.
The presence of acoustic enhancement aids in the identification of cystic masses but some solid masses, especially lymphoma, may also show acoustic enhancement posteriorly.ultrasound artifacts

Acoustic impedance (Z) is a physical property of tissue.
It describes how much resistance an ultrasound beam encounters as it passes through a tissue.
Acoustic impedance depends on:the density of the tissue (d, in kg/m3)the speed of the sound wave (c, in m/s)and they are related by:Z = d x c So, if the density of a tissue increases, impedance increases.
Similarly, but less intuitively, if the speed of sound increases, then impedance also increases.
The effect of acoustic impedance in medical ultrasound becomes noticeable at interfaces between different tissue types.
The ability of an ultrasound wave to transfer from one tissue type to another depends on the difference in impedance of the two tissues.
If the difference is large, then the sound is reflected.
We grasp this intuitively at a macroscopic level.
If you were to yell into a canyon, you would expect an echo to return to you.
The sound wave in air meets the dense rocky canyon wall and reverberates off it back to you; the sound wave does not just pass into the rock.
This is due to the difference in impedance.
Similarly, when an ultrasound beam passes through muscle tissue and encounters bone, it reflects off of it due to the difference in density between the tissues.
The amount of reflection that occurs in a perpendicular direction is expressed by:Reflection fraction = [(Z2 - Z1) / (Z2 + Z1)]2Where Z1 and Z2 represent the impedance in tissue 1 and tissue 2, respectively.
The signs in this equation are easy to remember because you can't reflect more sound than you originally sent, so the (Z2 - Z1) term must be the numerator.
Examples of impedance for bodily tissues (in kg/(m2s)):air  0.0004 × 106  lung  0.18 × 106 fat  1.34 × 106water  1.48 × 106kidney  1.63 × 106blood  1.65 × 106 liver  1.65 × 106muscle  1.71 × 106bone  7.8 × 106Using these values with the equation above, you would see that less than 1% of sound is reflected at a fat-liver interface.
If the sound wave is not perpendicular to a surface, some of the sound wave will be reflected away from the transducer.
The SI unit for acoustic impedance is the Rayl, kg/(m2s), after J W Strutt, 3rd Baron Rayleigh.

Acoustic shadowing on an ultrasound image is characterized by a signal void behind structures that strongly absorb or reflect ultrasonic waves.
This happens most frequently with solid structures, as sound conducts most rapidly in areas where molecules are closely packed, such as in bone or stones.
ultrasound artifacts

There are many acquired aortic conditions.
These includeaortic dissectionaortic rupture / transectionascending aortic aneurysmaortitisthoracic aortic injuryabdominal aortic aneurysminflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysminflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysm

Acquired cholesteatomas makeup 98% of all middle ear cholesteatomas and are almost always closely related to the tympanic membrane, from which most are thought to arise.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe vast majority of acquired cholesteatomas develop as a result of chronic middle ear infection and are usually associated with perforation of the tympanic membrane.
Clinical presentation usually consists of conductive hearing loss, often with purulent discharge from the ear 6.
Patients may also present due to one of many complications, which include: labyrinthine fistula (perilymphatic fistula)cochlear fistula: less commonlabyrinthitisfacial nerve dysfunction including the rare inflammatory neuroma of the facial nerveextension through inner ear into internal acoustic meatus leading to deafnessextension into the middle cranial fossa with possible meningitis, cerebral abscess, etc.extension into the petrous apex (rare) with similar complications to petrous apicitisCholesteatomas are composed of densely packed desquamated keratinizing squamous cells, arising from a peripheral shell of inward-facing epithelium.
As cells mature, they continue to be shed into the mass, resulting in slow growth 1-3.
There are four hypotheses that relate to the formation of cholesteatomas; all may be true 1,6:invagination/negative pressureprobably the most common causeresults from Eustachian tube dysfunction and tympanic membrane retraction, with debris and keratin eventually obstructing the neck of the retractioninvasion/migrationin the setting of a previous perforationkeratinized cells 'invade' the middle ear through the perforationbasal cell hyperplasia and papillary ingrowthinvasive hyperplasia of the basal cell layer of the tympanic membrane as a result of infectionmetaplasiaas a result of chronic irritation from middle ear infectionprobably the most common causeresults from Eustachian tube dysfunction and tympanic membrane retraction, with debris and keratin eventually obstructing the neck of the retractionin the setting of a previous perforationkeratinized cells 'invade' the middle ear through the perforationinvasive hyperplasia of the basal cell layer of the tympanic membrane as a result of infectionas a result of chronic irritation from middle ear infectionCT is the modality of choice for diagnostic assessment of cholesteatomas, due to its ability to demonstrate the bony anatomy of the temporal bone in exquisite detail.
Cholesteatomas appear as regions of soft-tissue attenuation, exerting mass effect and resulting in bony erosion.
Findings depend on the part of the tympanic membrane the cholesteatoma arises from: pars flaccida (82%) superior extension: most common, it expands into Prussak space, eventually eroding the scutum and displacing the ossicles mediallyinferior extension: less common, but more frequently seen in childrenpars tensaposterosuperior (78%): extends medial to the incus and displaces the ossicles laterallyanterior and inferior (22%)superior extension: most common, it expands into Prussak space, eventually eroding the scutum and displacing the ossicles mediallyinferior extension: less common, but more frequently seen in childrenposterosuperior (78%): extends medial to the incus and displaces the ossicles laterallyanterior and inferior (22%)Although MRI is unable to adequately delineate bony anatomy, it can potentially distinguish non-specific opacification from cholesteatomas.
It is particularly useful in the postoperative setting when CT may be indeterminate, since granulation tissue, scarring and recurrent cholesteatoma may all appear similar 2.
Cholesteatomas demonstrate:T1: low signalT2: high signalT1 C+ (Gd): no enhancementDWI: diffusion restrictionDiffusion-weighted imaging is particularly useful when distinguishing a cholesteatoma from other middle ear masses.
It is the only entity that demonstrates high signal intensity on DWI.
However, the sequence is prone to artefact and care must be taken how the sequence is performed and interpreted 2.
Non-echo planar DWI is superior for the diagnosis of cholesteatoma and is therefore preferred if it is available 8.
DWI (especially non-EPI DWI) is particularly useful in cases of suspected post-surgical recurrence.
The mechanism responsible for a high signal on DWI remains somewhat uncertain but is thought to represent either T2 shine-through alone or in combination with true restricted diffusion 2-4.Surgical excision is curative.
However, recurrence is not uncommon because the lesion is often difficult to remove completely.
The differential of a middle ear mass includes:cholesterol granulomahigh T1 signalno enhancementno restriction diffusionmucoid impactionglomus tympanicumfacial nerve schwannomahigh T1 signalno enhancementno restriction diffusionFollowing resection of a cholesteatoma, the differential for a soft-tissue middle ear mass includes the entities above, but is usually restricted to three entities 2:recurrent cholesteatomahigh T1 signalno enhancementincreased signal on DWIgranulation tissueintermediate T1 signalenhancementlow signal on DWIscarringlow T1 and T2 signallow signal on DWIhigh T1 signalno enhancementincreased signal on DWIintermediate T1 signalenhancementlow signal on DWIlow T1 and T2 signallow signal on DWI

Acquired cystic kidney disease (ACKD) is a condition that occurs in patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD), especially when on dialysis treatment.
They do not have a history of other cystic renal disease.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIts incidence increases with the amount of time a patient is azotemic and has been estimated at 44% after three years of dialysis and 90% after ten years of dialysis 5.
It is equally common with haemodialysis as with peritoneal dialysis 3.Usually asymptomatic.
Cyst hemorrhage may cause flank pain and hematuria 3.Although uremia is associated with an eventual development of acquired cystic kidney disease, the pathogenesis is currently unknown.
Some theories suggest that tubular epithelial hyperplasia from accumulation of growth factors, such as epidermal growth factor may play a role 7.The hyperplastic renal cysts in ACKD have been considered a possible source of dialysis-associated renal cell carcinoma.
The classic imaging appearance is multiple bilateral small renal cysts, occurring in both the cortex and medulla, with both kidneys typically small in size (refer to the chronic kidney disease (CKD) article for a broad discussion on the condition's correlated imaging findings).Diagnostic criteria include:patients with chronic renal failurekidneys usually decreased in size>3-5 cysts in each kidneycysts are mostly cortical, but may also be medullarykidneys usually decreased in sizeRenal transplantation has been thought to resolve acquired renal cysts, but there is still a risk of renal cell carcinoma in the native kidneys.hemorrhage into cysts, which occurs occasionallydevelopment of renal cell carcinoma in ~7% imaging screening for these patients is controversial 2,4,6one screening strategy images patients <55 years old who have been on dialysis for three years 3imaging screening for these patients is controversial 2,4,6one screening strategy images patients <55 years old who have been on dialysis for three years 3one screening strategy images patients <55 years old who have been on dialysis for three years 3ACKD was first described in 1977 by MS Dunnil et al.
4,6.

Acquired hepatocerebral degeneration is an uncommon irreversible extrapyramidal neurodegenerative condition encountered in patients with cirrhotic chronic liver disease, resulting in widespread cerebral, basal ganglia and cerebellar damage.
TerminologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAcquired hepatocerebral degeneration is a term that is restricted to patients which cirrhotic liver disease resulting from a variety of causes  but specifically excluding Wilson disease; in fact this condition is often termed acquired non-Wilsonian hepatocerebral degeneration to ensure the distinction is made.
Acute neurological dysfunction from hyperammoniaema or other transient alterations in hepatic metabolism is termed hepatic encephalopathy and is discussed separately.
Occasionally acquired hepatocerebral degeneration is referred to as chronic hepatic encephalopathy, although this is probably best avoided.
Patients with acquired hepatocerebral degeneration usually, but not always, have had multiple prior episodes of hepatic encephalopathy 6.
They present with gradual neurological dysfunction including dementia, rigidity, dysarthria, gait ataxia, tremor and choreoathetosis 5.Although the pathophysiology of acquired hepatocerebral degeneration is uncertain, manganese overload is believed to be part of the disease and responsible for the T1 shortening observed in the globus pallidus 7.
T1​intrinsic high signal intensity in the globus pallidus +/- subthalamic region, and midbrain (substantia nigra)1-5thought to be a reflection of increased tissue concentrations of manganese 1-4may reverse following liver transplantation 6T2increased signal in the middle cerebellar peduncles (MCP sign) 5​intrinsic high signal intensity in the globus pallidus +/- subthalamic region, and midbrain (substantia nigra)1-5thought to be a reflection of increased tissue concentrations of manganese 1-4may reverse following liver transplantation 6increased signal in the middle cerebellar peduncles (MCP sign) 5Acquired hepatocerebral degeneration is generally thought to be irreversible, although recovery following liver transplantation has been reported 6.

Acquired tonsillar ectopia is usually thought of as a subgroup of cerebellar tonsillar ectopia in which downward displacement of the cerebellar tonsils is secondary to another well defined and distinct pathological process.
This is to distinguish it from Chiari I malformations and low-lying tonsils.
The terminology of caudally displaced tonsils is discussed in the article on cerebellar tonsillar ectopia.
Causes of acquired tonsillar ectopia include: raised intracranial pressuretonsillar herniation from trauma or tumorpseudotumor cerebri (idiopathic intracranial hypertension)decreased intracranial pressurespontaneous craniospinal hypotension (e.g. CSF leak)CSF drainage or shunting (e.g. ventriculoperitoneal shunt)tonsillar herniation from trauma or tumorpseudotumor cerebri (idiopathic intracranial hypertension)spontaneous craniospinal hypotension (e.g. CSF leak)CSF drainage or shunting (e.g. ventriculoperitoneal shunt)

An acquired tracheo-esophageal fistula refers to a pathological communication between the trachea and esophagus due to a secondary cause PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresAcquired causes of tracheo-esophageal fistulae can be divided into those that are related to malignancy (common) and those from other causes (uncommon).
Malignancy-related causes:malignancyin the elderly, they are most frequently seen with an intrathoracic malignancy and are most commonly associated with malignancy of the esophagusthis is often from malignant tissue spreading to involve the tracheal or bronchial wall and with subsequent ulceration and necrosis of the malignant tissue leading to tissue breakdown and fistula formation.radiotherapyin the elderly, they are most frequently seen with an intrathoracic malignancy and are most commonly associated with malignancy of the esophagusthis is often from malignant tissue spreading to involve the tracheal or bronchial wall and with subsequent ulceration and necrosis of the malignant tissue leading to tissue breakdown and fistula formation.
Non-malignant causes: infrequenttrauma (blunt, penetrating, or iatrogenic):  e.g. gunshot wounds 3chronic inflammation: chronic infections - tracheal wall necrosis or necrotizing inflammation is usually the cause for fistulization.
tuberculosishistoplasmosispost-tracheostomy 2tuberculosishistoplasmosisMay show the site and extent of direct communication in real time.
Fluoroscopy allows for dynamic evaluation of esophageal motility as well as evaluation of its lumen.
A routine CT study could miss fistulae if the fistula tract is collapsed.
Therefore a CT oral contrast swallow study is often performed in these situations.
A diluted preparation of a non-ionic iodinated contrast agent is recommended with patient given a mouthful bolus of the preparation and asked to swallow it promptly on instruction to do so during the scan.
Ct may accurately show the extent of the fistulation as well as complication such as aspiration effects in the lungs.
On imaging consider delayed presentation of a congenital tracheo-esophageal fistula .

The time of acquisition for a conventional spin echo or gradient echo sequence is the product of the repetition time, phase encoding steps, and number of averages (TR x phase steps x NEX).
For example, with a one second TR, 128 phase steps, and two averages we would get an acquisition time of about 1 x 128 x 2 = 256 seconds or 4 minutes and 16 seconds.
The actual time will be slightly longer.
Fast spin echo and fast gradient echo sequences perform more than one phase encoding step per repetition time, resulting in reduced acquisition time by the number of phase step per repetition time.
Needs more on other sequences

The adductor pollicis muscle is a large triangular muscle anterior to the plane of the interossei that crosses the palm.
It is the deepest muscle of the thenar eminence, and is one of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.origin:transverse head: 3rd metacarpaloblique head: capitate and bases of 2nd and 3rd metacarpalsinsertion: base of proximal phalanx and extensor hood of thumbaction: adducts thumbarterial supply: deep palmar archinnervation: deep branch of ulnar nervetransverse head: 3rd metacarpaloblique head: capitate and bases of 2nd and 3rd metacarpals

The adductor tubercle is a bony protuberance on the medial condyle of the femur and is located superior to the medial epicondyle.
It demarcates the inferior most aspect of the medial supracondylar line.
The adductor tubercle is the point of insertion for the adductor minimus and the hamstrings part of the adductor magnus.

Adenocarcinoma of the endometrium is the commonest histological subtype of endometrial cancer and accounts for up to 90% of such cases 1.endometrioid carcinomaserous type adenocarcinoma of the endometriumclear cell type adenocarcinoma of the endometriummucinous type adenocarcinoma of the endometriumImaging features are discussed in the article on endometrial carcinoma.

Adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder is rare and accounts for only ~1% of all bladder cancers (90% are transitional cell carcinomas).PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresMetaplasia of urinary bladder induced by chronic irritation or infection can lead to adenocarcinoma.
Pathological types of adenocarcinoma of the urinary bladder are:Bladder adenocarcinoma may be subclassified as primary (two-thirds are non-urachal and one-third are urachal 2) or secondary (metastases).persistent urachal remnant (most common)cystitis glandularis (itself secondary to bladder outlet obstruction, chronic infection and/or bladder calculi)schistosomiasis (bilharziasis), especially where endemicassociated with bladder exstrophydiffuse bladder wall thickeningstranding of perivesical fatregional lymphadenopathyinvasion of rectus musclescharacteristically in the midline at the dome of the bladder, or along the course of urachus (from the bladder to umbilicus)a midline, infraumbilical soft tissue mass with peripheral calcification is characteristically urachal adenocarcinoma unless proven otherwise (calcification in 70% of cases)usually large tumors (5-6 cm) with prominent extravesical componentmixed solid-cystic appearance in most casesa midline, infraumbilical soft tissue mass with peripheral calcification is characteristically urachal adenocarcinoma unless proven otherwise (calcification in 70% of cases)Solid components of the tumor are isointense, while cystic mucinous component appears hyperintense on T2W images.
Localizing a urachal carcinoma may be easier on the sagittal images.
Due to their extravesical location, urachal carcinomas present very late and thus carry a poor prognosis.
Radical cystectomy is considered the treatment of choice.
However, en bloc resection of the extravesical component, adjacent peritoneum and the abdominal wall is also needed.

Adenocarcinomas in situ (AIS) of the lung refer to a relatively new entity for a pre-invasive lesion in the lung.
This entity partly replaces the noninvasive end of the previous term bronchoalveolar carcinoma.
Adenocarcinoma in situ is defined as a localized adenocarcinoma of <3 cm that exhibits a lepidic growth pattern, with neoplastic cells along the alveolar structures but without stromal, vascular, or pleural invasion 1.PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAISs are localized adenocarcinomas of ≤3 cm, with no growth pattern other than lepidic, with neoplastic cells along the alveolar structures but without stromal, vascular, lymphatic, or pleural invasion, and no features of necrosis 6.
There are three histopathological subtypes, the most common is non-mucinous, with mucinous or mixed subtypes being rarely found.
While adenocarcinoma in situ is usually seen as a pure ground-glass nodule or a part-solid lung nodule, there can be overlap among the imaging features of atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, adenocarcinoma in situ, and invasive adenocarcinoma of the lung 1.Adenocarcinomas in situ are commonly associated with PET false-negative results.
FDG PET-CT is recommended when assessing subsolid ground-glass lung lesions that have a solid component measuring more than 8 mm 5.
Adenocarcinoma in situ carries an excellent prognosis, with reported survival rates of 100% following complete tumor resection 6.For follow-up guidelines consider - Fleischner Society pulmonary nodule recommendations

Adenocarcinoma in situ, minimally invasive adenocarcinoma and invasive adenocarcinoma of the lung are relatively new classification entities which replace the now-defunct term bronchoalveolar carcinoma (BAC).In 2011 the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) and several other societies jointly revised the classification for adenocarcinoma of lung 13.
The new classification strategy is based on a multidisciplinary approach to the diagnosis of lung adenocarcinoma.
The terms bronchoalveolar carcinoma and mucinous and non-mucinous bronchoalveolar carcinoma have been rendered obsolete.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresBefore a general discussion of the topic, it is worth highlighting some of the updated terminology and concepts, as for many who were taught the term bronchoalveolar carcinoma, some adjustment will be necessary 5:adenocarcinoma in situ of lung (AIS) (≤3 cm) has a number of subtypesthe most common subtype is non-mucinous and rarely mucinous or mixed subtypeshistological pattern: no growth pattern other than lepidic and no feature of necrosis or invasionminimally invasive adenocarcinoma of lung (MIA) ≤3 cmdescribes small solitary adenocarcinomas with either pure lepidic growth or predominant lepidic growth with ≤5 mm of stromal invasionthe most common subtype is non-mucinous and rarely mucinous or mixed subtypeshistological pattern: no growth pattern other than lepidic and no feature of necrosis or invasiondescribes small solitary adenocarcinomas with either pure lepidic growth or predominant lepidic growth with ≤5 mm of stromal invasionThe two invasive adenocarcinomas previously termed non-mucinous and mucinous bronchoalveolar carcinoma have been renamed:lepidic-predominant adenocarcinoma describes invasive adenocarcinoma with a predominant lepidic pattern with >5 mm invasion; formerly known as non-mucinous bronchoalveolar carcinomainvasive mucinous adenocarcinoma is a variant of invasive adenocarcinoma; formerly known as mucinous bronchoalveolar carcinomaAIS and MIA are an uncommon type of bronchial carcinoma which occurs most frequently among non-smokers, women and Asians.
It is a subtype of adenocarcinoma, but has a significantly different presentation, treatment and prognosis.
Adenocarcinoma in situ and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma represent between 2-14% of all primary pulmonary malignancies 11.
There is no significant gender predilection, unlike other lung cancer types which are more prevalent in men.
A focus of pulmonary fibrosis, e.g. tuberculosis scar, infarct, scleroderma.
Presentation is often insidious, and a large proportion (50%) of patients may be asymptomatic at the time of detection 1.
Alternatively, as these tumors can produce large quantities of mucus, patients may present with bronchorrhea.
Persistent consolidation for weeks despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy should raise the suspicion of a neoplastic process.
CT or guided biopsy may be planned in such cases.
Adenocarcinoma in situ: ≤3 cm, demonstrates a lepidic growth pattern, spreading along the walls of the lung without destroying the underlying architecture.
In addition, they are characterized by the absence of stromal, vascular or pleural invasion.
Minimally invasive adenocarcinoma: ≤3 cm, describes small solitary adenocarcinomas with either pure lepidic growth or predominant lepidic growth with ≤5 mm of stromal invasion.
Three pathological subtypes are recognized 3:non-mucinousmucinous: goblet cell (mucus-secreting), often multi-centricmixedThere are three recognized radiographic patterns 1single mass or nodular form (commonest): ~45 %consolidative form: ~30 %multinodular form: ~25 %May show segmental or lobar consolidation with chronic unilateral airspace opacification and air bronchograms.
Can also present as a pulmonary nodule, mass or a cluster of diffuse nodules 1,2.
The nodular form (commonest) can be indistinguishable from another subtype of adenocarcinoma or inflammatory granuloma on plain film 1.The appearance on CT depends on its pattern of growth; hence, it may appear as:a peripheral nodulecommonest appearancetypically solitary and well-circumscribed 5the nodule may be surrounded by a halo of ground-glass opacity, the so-called fried egg signcavitationpseudocavitation (presence of bubble-like lucencies) is recognized 1,5overt cavitary changes rarely occur (~7%)cavitating pulmonary metastases may occur (Cheerios sign 9)a focal area of ground glass (early sign)heterogeneous attenuationa region of ground glass, with or without consolidationhilar and mediastinal adenopathy and pleural effusion are uncommonair bronchograms may be seen (also known as the open bronchus sign)CT angiogram signcommonest appearancetypically solitary and well-circumscribed 5the nodule may be surrounded by a halo of ground-glass opacity, the so-called fried egg signcavitationpseudocavitation (presence of bubble-like lucencies) is recognized 1,5overt cavitary changes rarely occur (~7%)cavitating pulmonary metastases may occur (Cheerios sign 9)pseudocavitation (presence of bubble-like lucencies) is recognized 1,5overt cavitary changes rarely occur (~7%)cavitating pulmonary metastases may occur (Cheerios sign 9)heterogeneous attenuationair bronchograms may be seen (also known as the open bronchus sign)CT angiogram signF-18-FDG-PET is often negative 6,7.Surgical resection is required with either lobectomy or pneumonectomy.
Overall, tumors that demonstrate only lepidic growth tend to be indolent, with high 5-year survival.
However, solid, invasive components are frequently present and despite radical treatment, recurrence rates are high.
Mucinous subtypes have worse prognosis 4, probably due to aerogenous spread that forms infiltrating, multifocal, or satellite tumors 11.The entity formerly known as bronchoalveolar carcinoma was first described by Malassez in 1876, as a bilateral, multinodular form of malignant lung tumor 11,12.The shifting terminology of non-invasive adenocarcinoma reflects both an increased utilization of immunohistochemical testing, as well as advances in personalized cancer treatment.
Beginning with the 1999 World Health Organization guidelines, there has been an attempt to isolate purely non-invasive and minimally-invasive adenocarcinoma from more advanced adenocarcinoma, due to uniquely favourable prognosis in the former 14.
Prior to the 2011 IASLC/ATS/ERS update, various forms of invasive disease remained lumped into the BAC category.
Thus, scrapping the BAC classification was intended to further remove ambiguity.
General imaging differential considerations are broad, so it is useful to consider differentials for specific patterns, which include:differential of chronic alveolar opacitydifferential of a solitary pulmonary noduledifferential of ground glass opacitynon-small cell lung canceradenocarcinoma of the lunginvasive adenocarcinoma of the lunginvasive adenocarcinoma of the lung

Adenocarcinoma of the appendix, also referred to as nonmucinous adenocarcinoma of the appendix, is an uncommon type of appendiceal epithelial neoplasm.
Different from the appendiceal mucinous neoplasms, these tumors share similar epidemiology and pathology with colorectal adenocarcinoma.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesAs colorectal cancer, these tumors commonly occur in elderly patients, often in the 6th decade of life 1.
Appendicitis due to a tumoral obstruction of the appendix is a typical presentation (in 70% of cases 2).These tumors differ from polyps and adenomas, which are confined to the mucosal layer and do not invade the muscularis mucosae but are thought to arise from adenomas in virtually all cases 2.
They are classified as well, moderately, and poorly differentiated 1.Cross-sectional imaging usually shows an ill-defined soft tissue mass in the appendix, which can invade adjacent structures 3.The appearance of appendiceal adenocarcinoma with early obstruction is typically that of appendicitis, consisting of a thickened, inflamed appendix with non-filling with contrast material and periappendiceal fat stranding 2-3.Appendiceal cystadenocarcinoma can present as an appendiceal mucocele 2.

Adenocarcinoma of the cervix is a histological subtype of carcinoma of the cervix.
EpidemiologyPathologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresCervical adenocarcinoma is less common than squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of the cervix, accounting for ~12.5% of all cervical cancer.
Their proportionate prevalence is thought to be increasing and this is thought to be due to being less readily detected by exfoliative cytology obtained with the Papanicolaou test 2-3.As with squamous cell carcinomas, adenocarcinoma type also generally tend to arise from the squamocolumnar junction (SCJ).
They may arise from a precursor lesion, cervical adenocarcinoma in situ, and are almost always associated with HPV 18 5.
Aside from smoking, cervical adenocarcinoma has the same risk factors as cervical SCC (see: cervical carcinoma for further details of risk factors) 6.There are several subtypes that fall under this category and include:clear cell carcinoma of the cervixendometrioid carcinoma of the cervix: ~7% of adenocarcinomas mucinous carcinoma of the cervixadenoma malignum: ~3% of adenocarcinomas 2serous carcinoma of the cervixmesonephric carcinoma of the cervixadenoma malignum: ~3% of adenocarcinomas 2Adenocarcinomas in general (compared with squamous cell counterparts) are thought to generally give higher rates of thoracic and adrenal metastatic disease 1.WHO histological classification of tumors of the uterine cervix

Adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal glands is rare, with few cases reported in the literature since it was first described in 1996 1.
Primary adenocarcinoma of the lacrimal gland is extremely rare; only 9 cases have been reported in the literature 1,2.
It can be classified into high- and low-grade malignancies.
This neoplasm is histologically and immunohistochemically similar to salivary ductal carcinoma 3.PathologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresHistologic examination shows a well-circumscribed but unencapsulated neoplasm.
The cells are highlighted by the calponin immunostain, consistent with myoepithelial differentiation.
These cells have round to oval nuclei with a uniform vesicular chromatin pattern and small nucleoli.
Most of these cells exhibit cytoplasmic and membranous staining for C-kit (CD117).
p53 expression is seen in a minority of the nuclei.
A significant number of luminal structures contain mucicarmine-positive material.
The tumor cells are uniformly negative for GFAP.They usually present as unilateral gland enlargement with displacement of the eye.
A rounded extraconal mass centered around the lacrimal gland in the superolateral aspect of the orbit.
Axial and coronal CT shows peripheral and mild central heterogeneous enhancement.
Signal characteristics include:T1: intermediate intensity lacrimal fossa massT2: usually hyperintenseT1 C+: heterogeneous enhancementDWI and ADC: diffusion restriction of the peripherally enhancing componentThe tumor is usually treated with complete excision, lymph node dissection, and adjuvant radiotherapy.
Because there are few reports of this entity, its clinical behavior, prognosis and definitive treatment are still unknown 2,4.Possible differential considerations include:lacrimal gland sarcoidosisorbital pseudotumorlacrimal gland pleomorphic adenomalacrimal gland oncocytomalacrimal gland adenoid cystic carcinomalacrimal gland malignant lymphomabenign reactive lymphoid hyperplasialacrimal gland tumors

Adenocarcinoma of the lung is the most common histologic type of lung cancer.
Grouped under the non-small cell carcinomas of the lung, it is a malignant tumor with glandular differentiation or mucin production expressing in different patterns and degrees of differentiation.
This article brings a broad view over lung adenocarcinoma, for further details on each subtype, please refer to the specific articles listed below.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresIn 2011, the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC), American Thoracic Society (ATS), and European Respiratory Society (ERS) introduced a new classification and terminology for adenocarcinoma of the lung, which is now divided into:preinvasive adenocarcinoma lesionsatypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS)minimally invasive adenocarcinomainvasive adenocarcinoma -  invasive adenocarcinoma of the lunglepidic predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung formerly non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC)acinar predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungpapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungmicropapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungsolid predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung with mucin productionvariants of invasive adenocarcinoma invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC)colloid - colloid adenocarcinoma of the lungfetal (low and high grade) -  fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC)enteric - enteric adenocarcinoma of the lung / primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinomaatypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) adenocarcinoma in situ (AIS)lepidic predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung formerly non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC)acinar predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungpapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungmicropapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungsolid predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung with mucin productionvariants of invasive adenocarcinoma invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC)colloid - colloid adenocarcinoma of the lungfetal (low and high grade) -  fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC)enteric - enteric adenocarcinoma of the lung / primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinomaformerly non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC)invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC)colloid - colloid adenocarcinoma of the lungfetal (low and high grade) -  fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC)enteric - enteric adenocarcinoma of the lung / primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinomaIt is now considered the most common histological subtype in terms of prevalence.
Early symptoms are fatigue with mild dyspnea followed by a chronic cough and hemoptysis at a later stage.
Lung adenocarcinoma is primarily categorized on the basis of histopathologic evaluation, although testing for genetic mutations (e.g. EGFR, KRAS) is becoming increasingly important for consideration of therapy 1.preinvasive adenocarcinoma lesions atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) localized small cell proliferation, usually ≤0.5 cmhistological pattern: a focal proliferation of mildly to moderately atypical type II pneumocytes and/or Clara cells that line along the alveolar walls, alveolar septae, or respiratory bronchioleadenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) localized adenocarcinoma of ≤3 cm histological pattern: no growth pattern other than lepidic, with neoplastic cells along with the alveolar structures but without stromal, vascular, or pleural invasion, and no features of necrosis has a number of subtypes: the most common subtype is non-mucinous and, rarely, mucinous or mixed subtypesminimally invasive adenocarcinomalocalized adenocarcinoma of ≤3 cmhistological pattern: either pure lepidic or predominant lepidic growth pattern, with neoplastic cells along with the alveolar structures with ≤5 mm of stromal invasion.
These lesions should not show necrosis, lymphatic, vascular, or pleural invasion.
three histopathological subtypes are recognized:non-mucinous: by far the most common subtype mucinous: goblet cell (mucus-secreting), often multicentric, raremixedinvasive adenocarcinoma (>5 mm invasion​) - further subcategorization is recommended according to the dominant histologic patternlepidic predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung formerly non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC)acinar predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungpapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungmicropapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungsolid predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung with mucin productionvariants of invasive adenocarcinoma invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC)colloid -  colloid adenocarcinoma of the lungfetal (low and high grade) - fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC)enteric - enteric adenocarcinoma of the lung / primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinomaatypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) localized small cell proliferation, usually ≤0.5 cmhistological pattern: a focal proliferation of mildly to moderately atypical type II pneumocytes and/or Clara cells that line along the alveolar walls, alveolar septae, or respiratory bronchioleadenocarcinoma in situ (AIS) localized adenocarcinoma of ≤3 cm histological pattern: no growth pattern other than lepidic, with neoplastic cells along with the alveolar structures but without stromal, vascular, or pleural invasion, and no features of necrosis has a number of subtypes: the most common subtype is non-mucinous and, rarely, mucinous or mixed subtypeslocalized small cell proliferation, usually ≤0.5 cmhistological pattern: a focal proliferation of mildly to moderately atypical type II pneumocytes and/or Clara cells that line along the alveolar walls, alveolar septae, or respiratory bronchiolelocalized adenocarcinoma of ≤3 cm histological pattern: no growth pattern other than lepidic, with neoplastic cells along with the alveolar structures but without stromal, vascular, or pleural invasion, and no features of necrosis has a number of subtypes: the most common subtype is non-mucinous and, rarely, mucinous or mixed subtypeslocalized adenocarcinoma of ≤3 cmhistological pattern: either pure lepidic or predominant lepidic growth pattern, with neoplastic cells along with the alveolar structures with ≤5 mm of stromal invasion.
These lesions should not show necrosis, lymphatic, vascular, or pleural invasion.
three histopathological subtypes are recognized:non-mucinous: by far the most common subtype mucinous: goblet cell (mucus-secreting), often multicentric, raremixednon-mucinous: by far the most common subtype mucinous: goblet cell (mucus-secreting), often multicentric, raremixedlepidic predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung formerly non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC)acinar predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungpapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungmicropapillary predominant adenocarcinoma of the lungsolid predominant adenocarcinoma of the lung with mucin productionvariants of invasive adenocarcinoma invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC)colloid -  colloid adenocarcinoma of the lungfetal (low and high grade) - fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC)enteric - enteric adenocarcinoma of the lung / primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinomaformerly non-mucinous bronchioloalveolar carcinoma (BAC)invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (formerly mucinous BAC)colloid -  colloid adenocarcinoma of the lungfetal (low and high grade) - fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung (FLAC)enteric - enteric adenocarcinoma of the lung / primary pulmonary enteric adenocarcinomaOften it is impossible to radiographically distinguish between other histological lung cancer types.
A lung nodule is a rounded or irregular region of increased attenuation.
The amount of attenuation can further classify the nodules as either ground glass, subsolid or solid 1,2.Histologically, the ground-glass attenuation corresponds to a lepidic growth pattern and the solid component corresponds to invasive patterns.
Hence, the preinvasive category of adenocarcinoma in situ, minimally invasive adenocarcinoma, and the invasive subtype of lepidic-predominant adenocarcinoma are often seen as a ground-glass nodule or a subsolid nodule with a predominant ground-glass component.
On the other hand, the remaining invasive subtypes of adenocarcinoma usually manifest as a solid nodule but may also be subsolid and are only occasionally seen as ground-glass nodule 1,2.
The invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma subtype (formerly mucinous BAC) can have a variable appearance, including consolidation, air bronchograms, or multifocal subsolid nodules or masses 2.FDG-PET/CT is nowadays an essential tool for the lung cancer staging, in particular, assessing for the nodal and distant metastatic diseaseadenocarcinoma in situ, low-grade adenocarcinomas, and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma are commonly associated with PET false-negative results.
Given resolution limitations, FDG PET/CT is recommended when assessing subsolid ground-glass lung lesions that have a solid component measuring more than 8 mm 7 PET/CT definition of the gross tumor volume is commonly smaller than on CT, in ~15% of patients 7, therefore the T component of the TNM staging must be measured on CT or updated by the pathological stagingblooming artifact usually makes PET/CT less reliable to assess chest wall or diaphragmatic invasion 7FDG-PET/CT is nowadays an essential tool for the lung cancer staging, in particular, assessing for the nodal and distant metastatic diseaseadenocarcinoma in situ, low-grade adenocarcinomas, and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma are commonly associated with PET false-negative results.
Given resolution limitations, FDG PET/CT is recommended when assessing subsolid ground-glass lung lesions that have a solid component measuring more than 8 mm 7 PET/CT definition of the gross tumor volume is commonly smaller than on CT, in ~15% of patients 7, therefore the T component of the TNM staging must be measured on CT or updated by the pathological stagingblooming artifact usually makes PET/CT less reliable to assess chest wall or diaphragmatic invasion 7There are society guideline recommendations for the imaging follow-up of both ground glass and solid nodules: Fleischner Society guidelines 3.

Primary adenocarcinoma of the small bowel is about 50 times less common than colonic carcinoma.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresAlmost 50% of small bowel adenocarcinomas are found in the duodenum, especially near the ampulla.
In the remaining cases, the jejunum is more commonly involved than the ileum1.Risk factors include a history of:Crohn disease;Sprue;Peutz Jeghers syndrome;Lynch syndrome II;congenital bowel duplication;ileostomy or duodenal or jejunal bypass surgery.
More distal small bowel adenocarcinomas are more likely to be annular, duodenal adenocarcinomas tend to be papillary or polypoid1.CT shows a soft-tissue mass with heterogeneous attenuation, usually with moderate enhancement after intravenous administration of contrast material.may manifest as an annular narrowing with abrupt concentric or irregular “overhanging edges,” a discrete tumor mass or an ulcerative lesion.usually, only a short segment of the bowel is involved.
Gradual narrowing of the lumen leads to partial or complete small bowel obstruction1.A large, aggressive, ulcerated adenocarcinoma can be mistaken for lymphoma.
However, lymph node metastases in adenocarcinoma are usually less bulky than those in lymphoma.
Small bowel malignant tumors:carcinoid tumorleiomyosarcomalymphomamalignant GISTSmall bowel benign tumors:adenomatous polypvillous adenomaleiomyomalipomahamartomahemangioma

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the lacrimal glands is an extraconal malignancy usually originating from the orbital lobe of the lacrimal gland.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIt often presents with orbital pain and paresthesia, since this type of tumor is frequently associated with perineural spreading.
CT may show an infiltrative mass involving the lacrimal gland, very often associated with bony destruction, showing enhancement after contrast administration.
Signal characteristics include:T1: homogeneously hypointenseT2: usually isointense, but sometimes hypointense (basaloid subtype)T1 C+ (Gd): moderate enhancementinflammatory mass associated withgranulomatosis with polyangiitisSjögren's syndromesarcoidosislymphoid hyperplasia of the sinus glandsnon-Hodgkin lymphomaother neoplasms: pleomorphic adenoma (benign), squamous cell carcinoma, mucoepidermoid carcinomagranulomatosis with polyangiitisSjögren's syndromesarcoidosislacrimal gland tumorsadenoid cystic carcinomaadenoid cystic carcinoma of salivary glands

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the lung is a type of non-small cell lung cancer.
They are classified under lung carcinomas of the salivary gland type.
Primary occurrence in the lung parenchyma is rare, while in the thorax they occur more commonly as adenoid cystic carcinoma of the tracheobronchial tree.adenoid cystic carcinoma

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the breast is a rare subtype of breast cancer.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesThey account for only 0.1-0.4% of all breast cancers.
The tumor demonstrates a strikingly characteristic microscopic pattern similar to that of adenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glands.
They consist of a mixture of proliferative glandular tissue (an adenoid component) and stromal or basement membrane elements (a pseudoglandular or cylindromatous component).
Adenoid cystic carcinoma of the breast displays slowly progressive growth and rarely metastasizes to the axillary lymph nodes.
On pathologic analysis, it is characterized by the presence of mucin within the pseudocysts found in the tumor.
Typically tends to appear as developing asymmetric densities or irregular masses.
Can appear as irregular, heterogeneous, or hypoechoic masses with minimal vascularity on color Doppler imaging.
There is a paucity of data available on the MR imaging features of adenoid cystic carcinoma of the breast.
Described features include moderately hyperintense signal on T2-weighted TSE images, a characteristic that may be attributed to the myxoid stroma and cribriform pattern of the tumor 7.The overall prognosis is comparatively better than the usually unspecified breast cancers.
Nodal metastases are rare.
It was first described by F W Foote and F W Stewart in 1946 5.

Adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC) of the salivary glands is the second most common malignancy involving the minor salivary glands behind mucoepidermoid carcinoma and the second most common malignancy involving the parotid gland.
PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAdenoid cystic carcinomas arise more commonly in the minor salivary glands (~55%) than in the major salivary glands.
They are the most common sinonasal tumors of salivary origin.
They are locally aggressive with a propensity for perineural spread 5.
Generally, a distinction is made radiologically between low-grade and high-grade adenoid cystic carcinomas.
Low-grade tumors tend to be well-defined, in contradistinction to high-grade tumors, which appear infiltrative.
However, both subtypes are usually homogeneously enhancing after contrast administration.
Adenoid cystic carcinomas are frequently associated with perineural spread (via cranial nerve VII), which is well appreciated on MRI.T1: hypo- to isointenseT2: slightly hyperintense, with higher grades being markedly hyperintenseT1 C+ (Gd): homogeneous enhancementsalivary glands tumorsadenoid cystic carcinoma of the lacrimal glandadenoid cystic carcinomas

Adenoid cystic carcinomas of the tracheobronchial tree are a type of low-grade tracheal tumor.
They are considered to be the second most common primary tumor of the trachea.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThey are usually first recognized in patients in their 4th and 5th decades.
There is no recognized gender predilection.
Symptoms in patients with adenoid cystic carcinoma are usually related to airway obstruction and therefore includes dyspnea, cough, stridor, wheezing, and hemoptysis.
The tumors may be histologically classified into tubular, cribriform, and solid subtypes 6.
The tumors are usually low grade but may occasionally undergo high-grade transformation 7.There is no association with cigarette smoking or with other carcinogens.
9Adenoid cystic carcinomas usually arise in the lower trachea.
Less commonly they are found in the mainstem bronchi (where carcinoid tumors are much more common), lobar bronchi and, rarely, in the segmental bronchi and extrathoracic trachea.
On chest CT, these tumors have a notable tendency toward submucosal extension and typically manifest as:intraluminal mass of soft-tissue attenuation with extension through the tracheal wall, ordiffuse or circumferential wall thickening of the trachea, a soft-tissue mass filling the airway, orhomogeneous mass encircling the trachea with wall thickening in the transverse and longitudinal planesThe longitudinal extent of the tumors is greater than their axial extent and the tumors usually involve more than 180° of the airway circumference.
They can be variable in shape ranging from polypoid to broad-based.
Their margins are also variable and range from smooth to lobulated to irregular.
Intratumoral calcification is rare.tracheal massesadenoid cystic carcinoma: generaladenoid cystic carcinoma of the lungadenoid cystic carcinoma of the lung

Adenoid cystic carcinomas are a rare histological subtype of adenocarcinoma.
Adenoid cystic carcinomas are generally considered low grade 4.
The tumors have a notable tendency for perineural spread.
They have a wide distribution and mainly occur in relation to the airways, lacrimal glands and breasts.
Reported locations include:head and neckadenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glandsadenoid cystic carcinoma of the lacrimal glandsadenoid cystic carcinoma of the larynx 6hard palatenasopharynxrarely reported: eyelid 5adenoid cystic carcinoma of the breast 2tracheobronchial tree/respiratory tractadenoid cystic carcinoma of the tracheobronchial treesecond most common primary malignant tracheal neoplasm (after squamous cell carcinoma) 4previously also called a cylindroma in this location 4adenoid cystic carcinoma of the lungpelvisuterine/cervicaladenoid cystic carcinoma of the Bartholin glandsadenoid cystic carcinoma of the salivary glandsadenoid cystic carcinoma of the lacrimal glandsadenoid cystic carcinoma of the larynx 6hard palatenasopharynxrarely reported: eyelid 5adenoid cystic carcinoma of the tracheobronchial treesecond most common primary malignant tracheal neoplasm (after squamous cell carcinoma) 4previously also called a cylindroma in this location 4adenoid cystic carcinoma of the lungsecond most common primary malignant tracheal neoplasm (after squamous cell carcinoma) 4previously also called a cylindroma in this location 4uterine/cervicaladenoid cystic carcinoma of the Bartholin glands

Adenoid facies, also known as the long face syndrome, refers to the long, open-mouthed face of children with adenoid hypertrophy.
Hypertrophy of the nasopharyngeal pad of lymphoid tissues (adenoids) is the most common cause of nasal obstruction in children.
The mouth is always open because upper airway congestion has made patients obligatory mouth breathers.
Persistent mouth breathing due to nasal obstruction in childhood may be associated with the development of craniofacial anomalies such as the adenoid facies.
The most common presenting symptoms are chronic mouth breathing and snoring.
The most dangerous symptom is sleep apnea.
The characteristic facial appearance consists of:underdeveloped thin nostrilsshort upper lipprominent upper teethcrowded teethnarrow upper alveolus high-arched palatehypoplastic maxilla Adenoid facies is also typical of recurrent upper respiratory tract allergies.
Its diagnostic features are:Dennie's lines: horizontal creases under the lower eyelids (first described by the American physician Charlies Dennie)a nasal pleat: the horizontal crease just above the tip of the nose produced by the recurrent upward wiping of nasal secretions allergic shiners: bilateral shadows under the eyes produced by chronic venous congestion.
Adenoid facies can be part of Cowden syndromeEnlarged adenoids are not easily identified on physical examination.
A lateral radiograph of the nasopharynx provides a simple and cost-effective method for assessing the size of adenoids and the amount of post-nasal airway space remaining.
Another radiation-free method is direct endoscopic visualization with a laryngoscope.

The adenoid tonsils, or often just simply the adenoids (also known as the nasopharyngeal or pharyngeal tonsils), are paired foci of lymphatic tissue located on the superoposterior wall of the nasopharynx and form part of Waldeyer's ring.

Adenoidal hypertrophy or enlargement in adults is much less commonly seen than in children.
It is usually due to chronic infection or inflammation.
HIV always needs to be excluded as a cause.
In general, the adenoid tonsils enlarge after birth, maximizing by 6 years old.
Thereafter, the adenoids gradually involute and in most individuals can no longer be seen by 16 years old 1.Causes of adenoidal hypertrophy in adults may include infections, inflammation and allergy:allergyinfections (most common cause)rhinitis and/or sinusitisotitis mediaHIVmalignancysinonasal carcinomalymphomarhinitis and/or sinusitisotitis mediasinonasal carcinomalymphoma

Adenoidal hypertrophy or enlargement in children is common and due to an increase in the size of the adenoids.
For adenoidal enlargement in adults, which is much rarer and usually pathological, please see the separate article, adenoidal hypertrophy (adults).Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresnasal congestion: adenoid facies chronic or recurrent otitis media due to their proximity to the Eustachian tubes swallowing difficultiesspeech anomalies (hyponasal speech)rhinorrheasleep-disordered breathingAlthough present at birth, they are usually invisible until age 3 to 6 months.
They can grow until about age 6, then involute through adulthood.
Enlargement is pathological when they encroach on the nasopharyngeal airway, and this usually does not occur until age 1 to 2 years.
Both inflammatory and infectious causes should be considered.
Common infectious causes include:Haemophilus influenzae group A beta-hemolytic Streptococcus Staphylococcus aureus Moraxella catarrhalis Streptococcus pneumoniaeThe lateral neck x-ray is the main imaging study.
The size of the adenoids is less of a consideration than the degree to which they encroach on the nasopharyngeal airway:if no adenoidal tissue after age 6 months, suspect an immune deficiencyif enlarged adenoids persist well after childhood, suspect lymphatic malignancyManagement options include:waiting until they spontaneously involutesurgical removalIndications for an adenoidectomy include:enlargement causing nasal airway obstructionrecurrent or persistent otitis media in children aged 3 to 4 or older; it should be taken into account that treating otitis media resolves the resultant hearing impairment as wellrecurrent or chronic sinusitis

Adenolipoma of the thyroid gland (also known as a thyrolipoma or a thyroid hamartoma) is a rare, benign fat-containing thyroid lesion.
These lesions are usually well encapsulated and are composed of varying degrees of follicular thyroid tissue (thyroid adenoma) and mature adipose tissue; the amount of fat can markedly vary (from 10-90%).A large adenolipoma causing airway obstruction should be removed.
Surgical excision is curative 6.
As aforementioned, this lesion is benign and has no malignant potential.

Adenoma malignum of the cervix, also referred to as minimal deviation carcinoma / minimal deviation adenocarcinoma, is considered a rare variant of cervical carcinoma.
It is thought to represent ~1-3% of all cervical adenocarcinomas.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosis ReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisIt can present in a wide age group (~25-70 years) peaking at around 42 years 1.Common presenting symptoms are menometrorrhagia, vaginal (often watery) discharge, postmenopausal bleeding and abdominal swelling.
It is considered a rare variant of well-differentiated mucinous adenocarcinoma of the uterine cervix.
Multiple irregular lobulations of distorted glands demonstrating a "hairpin" shape are considered a characteristic pathological feature 5.Microscopic examination often shows glands which are irregular in size and shape and lined predominantly by mucin-containing columnar epithelial cells with basal nuclei.
Peutz-Jeghers syndrome 1,7mucinous tumors of the ovaryLesions can be multilocular cystic, multilocular cystic with solid components or predominantly solid on ultrasound.
The solid lesions are usually heterogeneous in echogenicity.
Color Doppler interrogation usually show moderate or abundant color content 10.May be seen as multiple cystic lesion containing variably sized solid portions extending from the endocervical gland to the deep stroma of the cervix.
Reported signal characteristics include:T1: isointense (majority) to slightly hyperintense relative to the uterus 4T2: markedly hyperintense relative to the uterus 4T1 C+ (Gd): solid components show contrast enhancementThe overall prognosis has been reported to be unfavorable due to dissemination into the peritoneal cavity even at an early stage of the disease due to response to radiation and/or chemotherapy being poor.
It is thought to have been first described by Gusserow in 1870 9.Considerations for a cystic multilocular cervical lesion (especially on MRI) include:pseudoneoplastic glandular lesionstunnel cluster 5endocervical glandular hyperplasia 5deep Nabothian cysts 5,8tunnel cluster 5endocervical glandular hyperplasia 5deep Nabothian cysts 5,8

The adenoma-carcinoma sequence refers to a stepwise pattern of mutational activation of oncogenes (e.g. K-ras) and inactivation of tumor suppressor genes (e.g. p53) that results in cancer.
An oncogene is a gene that has the potential to cause cancer.
In tumor cells, these are often mutated or expressed at high levels.
A tumor suppressor gene is a gene that is involved in dampening the cell cycle or promotion of apoptosis or both.
Examples include inactivation of p53 (resulting in osteosarcoma, endometrial carcinoma, and many others) and DNA repair proteins (e.g. hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer, multiple endocrine neoplasia,  BRCA).colorectal carcinoma (CRC)

Adenomatoid odontogenic tumors are rare and differ from most other dentition related lesions in that they more frequently occur in the maxilla.
They are also seen more frequently in females, most frequently in the second decade of life.
They present as an expansile radiolucency with well-circumscribed margins, most commonly in the maxilla (70%).
They also contain a variable amount of punctate calcifications.2005 WHO histological classification of odontogenic tumors

Adenomatoid tumors of the scrotum are benign, solid extratesticular lesions that can originate from the epididymis, tunica vaginalis, or spermatic cord (90% derived from the funiculus).EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThey are the most common extratesticular neoplasm, and most common tumor of the epididymis, and occur more often in the lower pole than in the upper pole by a ratio of 4:1.Usually an incidental finding, adenomatoid tumors manifest as a small (usually under 2 cm), painless scrotal mass, with the majority diagnosed in patients aged 20-50 years.
They are typically unilateral and occur more frequently on the left side.
When they grow non-invasively into the testicular parenchyma, they can simulate intratesticular disease.well-defined solid extratesticular mass with variable echogenicityrange in size from a few millimeters to a few centimetersMR imaging can aid in determining the paratesticular origin of the lesion.
T2: low signal intensity relative to the testicular parenchymaT1 C+ (Gd): show enhancementThey are benign with no reports of recurrence or metastatic disease after excision 5.General imaging differential considerations include:peritesticular lipomaperitesticular rhabdomyosarcomaperitesticular liposarcomasupernumerary testesa rare condition in which more than two testes are presentepididymitis scrotal tuberculosisa rare condition in which more than two testes are presentparatesticular lesions

Adenomatous breast lesions are benign tumors which grow from glandular parenchyma.
The breast is a conglomeration of various glandular tissues, hence they can be of several types.
tubular adenomalactating adenomaapocrine adenoma of breastpleomorphic adenoma of breastductal adenomafibroadenomaphyllodes tumorcomplex fibroadenomanipple adenomainfiltrating syringomatous adenoma

Adenomatous endometrial hyperplasia is a type of endometrial hyperplasia.
The peak incidence is around 40-50 years of age.
Both endogenous and exogenous estrogen exposure are considered important factors in its etiology 1.

An adenomyoma is a focal region of adenomyosis resulting in a mass, which is difficult to distinguish from a uterine fibroid, although in general the degree to which the contour of the uterus is distorted is less marked in adenomyosis 2.
Additionally, the 'mass' is poorly defined and blends with the surrounding myometrium.
Uterine fibroids on the other hand often have a pseudocapsule of compressed myometrial tissue surrounding them 2.
Some authors draw a distinction between focal adenomyosis and adenomyoma.
Adenomyomas, they contend, are a focal form of adenomyosis which is not in direct continuity with the junctional zone of the uterus 5.
For further discussion please refer to the article on adenomyosis.

Adenomyomatosis of the gallbladder is a hyperplastic cholecystosis of the gallbladder wall.
It is a relatively common and benign cause of diffuse or focal gallbladder wall thickening, most easily seen on ultrasound and MRI.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAdenomyomatosis is relatively common, found in ~9% of all cholecystectomy specimens 5.
It is typically seen in patients in their 5th decade.
The incidence increases with age, presumably the result of protracted inflammation (see below).
There is a female predilection (M:F=1:3).It is most often an incidental finding and usually requires no treatment.
It may be found more often in chronically inflamed gallbladders (which are at higher risk for carcinoma), but it is not a premalignant lesion in itself 5.Adenomyomatosis per se is usually asymptomatic.
It is, however, frequently associated with chronic biliary inflammation, most commonly gallstones (25-75%), but also seen in cholesterolosis (33%) and pancreatitis 2.Adenomyomatosis is one of the hyperplastic cholecystoses.
There is hyperplasia of the wall with the formation of Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses (intramural diverticula lined by mucosal epithelium) penetrating into the muscular wall of the gallbladder, with or without gallbladder wall thickening.
Cholesterol accumulation in adenomyomatosis is intraluminal, as cholesterol crystals precipitate in the bile trapped in Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses.
Three morphological types of adenomyomatosis are described:fundal (localized)segmental (annular)generalized (diffuse)mural thickening (diffuse, focal, annular)segmental/annular form is especially difficult to distinguish from gallbladder carcinomacomet-tail artefact: echogenic intramural foci from which emanate V-shaped comet tail reverberation artefacts are highly specific for adenomyomatosis, representing the unique acoustic signature of cholesterol crystals within the lumina of Rokitansky-Aschoff sinuses 4segmental/annular form is especially difficult to distinguish from gallbladder carcinomaabnormal gallbladder wall thickening and enhancement are common but non-specific CT features of adenomyomatosisRokitansky-Aschoff sinuses of sufficient size can be visualized; a CT rosary sign has been described, formed by enhancing epithelium within intramural diverticula surrounded by the relatively unenhanced hypertrophied gallbladder muscularisMRCP is the technique usually employed for the gallbladder and biliary tree characterization.
Imaging features include:mural thickeningfocal sessile massfluid-filled intramural diverticulapearl necklace sign refers to the characteristically curvilinear arrangement of multiple rounded hyperintense intraluminal cavities visualized on T2-weighted MR imaging and MRCP 4hourglass configuration in annular typespearl necklace sign refers to the characteristically curvilinear arrangement of multiple rounded hyperintense intraluminal cavities visualized on T2-weighted MR imaging and MRCP 4Metabolic characterization with FDG PET has been suggested as a useful adjunct in problematic cases 4, but there have also been cases with increased uptake in areas of adenomyomatosis, leading to false positive results 6Cholecystectomy may be performed as a result of one or more of the following:patient symptomatic with right upper quadrant pain (often due to gallstones)appearances (especially when focal) may be difficult to distinguish from malignancyGeneral imaging differential considerations include:gallbladder carcinomaPhrygian capgallbladder polyp (cholesterol polyp)cholelithiasispapillomatosis 8Exclusion of gallbladder cancer may be most problematic in segmental and focal cases.
Focal adenomyomatosis may appear as a discrete mass, known as an adenomyoma.

Adenomyosis is a common uterine condition of ectopic endometrial tissue in the myometrium, sometimes considered a spectrum of endometriosis.
Although most commonly asymptomatic, it may present with menorrhagia and dysmenorrhea.
Pelvic imaging (i.e. ultrasound, MRI) may show characteristic findings.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresClassically, adenomyosis most commonly affects multiparous women of reproductive age.
However, this is based on the results of studies with pathologic examinations of hysterectomy specimens, therefore biased towards patients who had surgery.
Similarly, this may be the reason adenomyosis is seen with higher frequency in women with a history of uterine surgical procedures (e.g. Cesarean section, dilatation and curettage).
Patients with high estrogen exposure (e.g. short menstrual cycles, early menarche) have an increased risk of adenomyosis.
The reported incidence ranges widely from 5-70% (mean 20-30%), depending on the histological definition or the imaging modality used 12.Most patients with adenomyosis are asymptomatic.
Symptoms related to adenomyosis include dysmenorrhea, menorrhagia, dyspareunia, chronic pelvic pain, and menometrorrhagia 11.
The ectopic endometrial glands within the myometrium do not respond to cyclic ovarian hormones, unlike those of endometriosis.
Pelvic tenderness on examination is associated with diffuse enlargement of the uterus.
Adenomyosis is histologically-defined as the presence of ectopic endometrial tissue within the myometrium.
The exact cause of adenomyosis is unknown, but it is thought that endometrial glands directly invade the myometrium resulting in spiral vessel angiogenesis, and adjacent smooth muscle hyperplasia and hypertrophy.
It has been postulated that this dysfunctional hypertrophied muscular tissue surrounding the ectopic endometrial glands prevents uterine contractions from tamponading bleeding myometrial arterioles; hence, these patients frequently present with dysfunctional uterine bleeding or menorrhagia.
Other hypotheses include invagination of the endometrium through the basalis alongside the intramyometrial lymphatics and embryologically displaced pluripotent mullerian remnants.co-existent endometriosis reported in 20% of cases 1leiomyomas: may be present in almost 50% of cases involving adenomyosis of the uterus 14other reported associations includeendometrial hyperplasia 14endometrial polyps 14endometrial hyperplasia 14endometrial polyps 14Imaging features are variable and in many instances very subtle.
Three (some say four) forms can be distinguished:diffuse adenomyosis: most commonfocal adenomyosis and adenomyoma: sometimes considered distinct (see below)cystic adenomyosis and adenomyotic cyst: rareAdenomyosis is usually relatively generalized, affecting large portions of the uterus (typically the posterior wall), but sparing the cervix.
Despite often marked enlargement of the uterus, the overall contour is usually preserved 5.In some cases, adenomyosis may be localized, forming a mass.
In such cases, the term adenomyoma may be used, although there appears to be some disagreement about whether the terms focal adenomyosis and adenomyoma refer to exactly the same entity (please refer to the article on adenomyoma for further discussion).A rare variant is cystic adenomyosis which is believed to be the result of repeated focal hemorrhages resulting in cystic spaces filled with altered blood products 5.Although pelvic ultrasound is the primary imaging modality employed to investigate menorrhagia and dysmenorrhea, the sonographic features are variable and the sensitivity is operator and technique dependent.
For example, the sensitivity and specificity of transabdominal ultrasound 32-63% and 95-97%, respectively 7.
Yet transvaginal ultrasound is reported to be as sensitive (89%) and specific (89%) as MRI.It may be useful to categorize ultrasound findings into three groups that mirror the histological findings 15-17:"adeno": ectopic endometrial glandssubendometrial echogenic linear striations and/or nodules (specific sign), extending from endometrium and into inner myometriumhyperechoic islands19irregular endometrial–myometrial junction 19tiny (1-5 mm) anechoic myometrial and subendometrial cysts (specific sign): reflecting glands filled with fluidcystic striations"myosis": muscular hyperplasia +/- hypertrophy, which may be hypoechoicfocal or diffuse myometrial bulkiness, which may be asymmetric 5typically of the fundal region and posterior wallfocal lesions have relatively indistinct borders, compared to leiomyomasasymmetrical myometrial thickeningthickening of the transition zone can sometimes be visualized as a hypoechoic halo surrounding the endometrial layer of ≥12 mm thickness (less specific)vascularity: flow on color Dopplergenerally increasedincreased number of tortuous vessels penetrating myometriumareas of increased vascularity reciprocate distribution of lesionssubendometrial echogenic linear striations and/or nodules (specific sign), extending from endometrium and into inner myometriumhyperechoic islands19irregular endometrial–myometrial junction 19tiny (1-5 mm) anechoic myometrial and subendometrial cysts (specific sign): reflecting glands filled with fluidcystic striationsfocal or diffuse myometrial bulkiness, which may be asymmetric 5typically of the fundal region and posterior wallfocal lesions have relatively indistinct borders, compared to leiomyomasasymmetrical myometrial thickeningthickening of the transition zone can sometimes be visualized as a hypoechoic halo surrounding the endometrial layer of ≥12 mm thickness (less specific)typically of the fundal region and posterior wallgenerally increasedincreased number of tortuous vessels penetrating myometriumareas of increased vascularity reciprocate distribution of lesionsA "Venetian blind" or "rain shower" appearance (linear striations, parallel shadowing) may be seen as a combination of the aforementioned features: heterogeneous 1,2,20, coarsened echotexture of the myometrium, and acoustic shadowing where endometrial tissues cause a hyperplastic reaction.
The combination of this heterogeneity and the subendometrial echogenic nodular and linear striations is not dissimilar to the appearance of chronic liver parenchymal disease - hence, “cirrhosis of the uterus.
”When an adenomyoma is present, appearances may closely mimic those of a uterine fibroid, which may also co-exist.
May show diverticula extending into the myometrium 3.CT is insensitive for adenomyosis, but may demonstrate resulting uterine enlargement.
Distinguishing adenomyosis and uterine fibroids on CT is challenging, although the presence of calcifications strongly favors the latter 5.Pelvic MRI is the modality of choice to diagnose and characterize adenomyosis.
Small field of view T2-weighted images (sagittal and axial) are most useful.
MRI has a sensitivity of 78-88% and specificity of 67-93% 7.The most easily recognized feature is thickening of the junctional zone ≥12 mm, either diffusely or focally (normal junctional zone thickness is up to ~5 mm) 5.T1foci of high T1 signal are often seen, indicating menstrual hemorrhage into the ectopic endometrial tissues 7T2typically a region of adenomyosis appears as an ill-defined ovoid/diffuse region of thickening, often with small high T2 signal regions representing small areas of cystic changethe region may also have a striated appearance 5T1 C+ (Gd)contrast-enhanced MRI evaluation is usually not required for evaluation of adenomyosis, however, if performed, shows enhancement of the ectopic endometrial glandsfoci of high T1 signal are often seen, indicating menstrual hemorrhage into the ectopic endometrial tissues 7typically a region of adenomyosis appears as an ill-defined ovoid/diffuse region of thickening, often with small high T2 signal regions representing small areas of cystic changethe region may also have a striated appearance 5contrast-enhanced MRI evaluation is usually not required for evaluation of adenomyosis, however, if performed, shows enhancement of the ectopic endometrial glandsTreatment depends on the severity of symptoms and the need to preserve fertility.
In some instances, suppression of normal cyclical hormone-induced proliferation of endometrial tissue (e.g. GnRH agonist) is sufficient.
In women with severe symptoms not relieved medically, and in whom fertility is no longer desirable, a hysterectomy may be performed.
It was first described by Rokitansky in 1860 as “cystosarcoma adenoides uterinum”, and later defined by Von Recklinghausen in 1896 11.
The modern definition of adenomyosis was thought to have been provided in 1972 by Bird et.al 13 .The differential depends on the macroscopic distribution of endometrial tissue.
For diffuse disease consider:normal uterusdiffuse uterine leiomyomatosismyometrial contraction: transient findingmalignancyendometrial carcinomaendometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS)endometrial carcinomaendometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS)For focal disease (adenomyoma) consider:uterine fibroid (leiomyoma)better defined than adenomyomamay have pseudocapsule of compressed adjacent myometrial tissue 5on color Doppler: tend to displace vessels, demonstrating circumferential peripheral flowuterine contractionstransient in naturevascular malformationsdoes not disrupt the endometrial-myometrial interfaceon color Doppler: demonstrates turbulent high-velocity flowmalignancyendometrial carcinomaendometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS)uterine tumor (e.g. uterine leiomyosarcoma)myometrial metastases better defined than adenomyomamay have pseudocapsule of compressed adjacent myometrial tissue 5on color Doppler: tend to displace vessels, demonstrating circumferential peripheral flowtransient in naturedoes not disrupt the endometrial-myometrial interfaceon color Doppler: demonstrates turbulent high-velocity flowendometrial carcinomaendometrial stromal sarcoma (ESS)uterine tumor (e.g. uterine leiomyosarcoma)myometrial metastases Whether focal or diffuse, another potential differential is treatment of breast cancer with tamoxifen which can lead to poorly-defined endometrial hyperplasia and endometrial polyps that can mimic adenomyosis 4 (see: tamoxifen-associated endometrial changes).

An adenomyotic cyst is an extremely rare variation of cystic adenomyosis.
The lesion consists of a large hemorrhagic cyst, which is partly or entirely surrounded by a solid wall.
It can be entirely within the myometrium, submucosal, or subserosal and frequently is associated with symptoms of menorrhagia and dysmenorrhea.
Considerations include:uterine leiomyoma with hemorrhagic degenerationuterine duplicational anomaly complicated hematometra in on hornadenomyosis of the uterus

Adenosquamous cell carcinoma (ASC) of the cervix is a rare histological subtype of cervical carcinoma.
PathologyPrognosisSee alsoReferencesIt has components of both cervical adenocarcinoma and cervical squamous cell carcinoma.
An adenosquamous histology appears to be an independent predictor of poor outcome in women with cervical carcinoma compared with their counterparts who have pure adenocarcinoma.
A significant decrease in survival, however, applies to patients with advanced-stage disease, usually FIGO stage IIb or above 1-2.WHO histological classification of tumors of the uterine cervix

Adenosis of the breast is a benign lobulocentric proliferative process in which lobules are enlarged and increased in number in addition to an increased number of glands within each lobule.
Pathologically subclassified into three main subtypes which include:sclerosing adenosis of the breastblunt duct adenosis of the breastmicroglandular adenosis of the breast

Adenosquamous carcinoma of the endometrium is a rare histological sub type of endometrial cancer.
In general it occurs in a slightly younger group when compared with pure adenocarcinoma of the endometrium 4.It contains both malignant glandular and malignant squamous components.
Adenosquamous carcinoma tended to be slightly higher grade at presentation when compared to pure adenocarcinoma of the endometrium 2,5.

Adenosquamous carcinoma (ASC) of the lung is a rare type of non-small cell lung cancer.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresIt is thought to constituting 0.4-4% of cases non-small cell lung cancer.
The definition of adenosquamous carcinoma indicates a carcinoma showing components of adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, with each comprising at least 10% of the tumor 4.There may be a slight predominance towards the periphery of the lung 5-6.There appears to be a wide imaging spectrum both in terms of size and morphology 5.
Differentiation from other histological forms on imaging grounds alone can be difficult.
They usually present as a single lesion, with mean tumor size ranging from 2.8 to 3.8 cm (range 0.6-11 cm), based on two studies 5-6.It is thought to be more aggressive than both pure adenocarcinoma of the lung and pure squamous cell carcinoma of the lung 1.
Early stage disease may be amenable to surgery.
There may also be an increased rate of lymph node metastases at the time of presentation compared with other histological types 7.

Adhesive atelectasis refers to the specific form of lung atelectasis that occurs due to the decrease or absence of pulmonary surfactant produced by type II pneumocytes.
Without sufficient surfactant the alveoli collapse due to increased surface tension.
It is most commonly seen in the neonate with RDS.respiratory distress syndrome of the newborn: surfactant deficiencyARDSsmoke inhalationhypoxemiaprolonged shallow breathsuremiapost operative i.e cardiac bypass surgerypulmonary embolismpulmonary hemorrhageacute radiation pneumonitispneumonia

Adhesive capsulitis of the shoulder, also known as frozen shoulder, is a condition characterized by thickening and contraction of the shoulder joint capsule and surrounding synovium.
Adhesive capsulitis can rarely affect other sites such as the ankle 8.EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresThe incidence in the general population is thought to be 3-5%.
Adhesive capsulitis typically affects women in their 5th to 6th decades, although patients with co-morbidities such as diabetes mellitus may develop the condition at earlier ages.
The incidence in patients with diabetes is reported to be 2 to 4 times higher than in the general population.
Adhesive capsulitis presentation can be broken into three distinct stages:freezing: painful stage patients may not present during this stage because they think that eventually, the pain will resolve if self-treatedas the symptoms progress, pain worsens and both active and passive range of motion (ROM) becomes more restrictedthis can eventually result in the patient seeking medical consultationtypically lasts between 3 and 9 months and is characterized by an acute synovitis of the glenohumeral jointfrozen: transitional stagemost patients will progress to the second stageduring this stage, shoulder pain does not necessarily worsenbecause of pain at the end of the range of motion, arm movement may be limited, causing muscular disusecan last between 4 to 12 monthsthe common capsular pattern of limitation has historically been described as diminishing motions with external shoulder rotation being the most limited, followed closely by shoulder flexion, and internal rotationa point is eventually reached in the frozen stage where pain does not occur at the end of the range of motionthawing stage begins when the range of motion starts to improvelasts anywhere from 12 to 42 months and is defined by a gradual return of shoulder mobilitypatients may not present during this stage because they think that eventually, the pain will resolve if self-treatedas the symptoms progress, pain worsens and both active and passive range of motion (ROM) becomes more restrictedthis can eventually result in the patient seeking medical consultationtypically lasts between 3 and 9 months and is characterized by an acute synovitis of the glenohumeral jointmost patients will progress to the second stageduring this stage, shoulder pain does not necessarily worsenbecause of pain at the end of the range of motion, arm movement may be limited, causing muscular disusecan last between 4 to 12 monthsthe common capsular pattern of limitation has historically been described as diminishing motions with external shoulder rotation being the most limited, followed closely by shoulder flexion, and internal rotationa point is eventually reached in the frozen stage where pain does not occur at the end of the range of motionbegins when the range of motion starts to improvelasts anywhere from 12 to 42 months and is defined by a gradual return of shoulder mobilityAdhesive capsulitis is divided into two main types: primary or idiopathicabsence of preceding traumasecondary major or minor repetitive traumashoulder or thoracic surgeryendocrine, e.g. diabetes, hyperthyroidism 12rheumatological conditionsabsence of preceding traumamajor or minor repetitive traumashoulder or thoracic surgeryendocrine, e.g. diabetes, hyperthyroidism 12rheumatological conditionsDescribed features on fluoroscopic arthrography include:limited injectable fluid capacity of the glenohumeral joint small dependent axillary foldsmall subscapularis bursairregularity of the anterior capsular insertion at the anatomic neck of the humeruslymphatic filling may be presentlimitation of movement of the supraspinatus is considered a sensitive feature 7thickened coracohumeral ligament (CHL) can be suggestive 9echogenic material around the long head of biceps at rotator intervalincreased vascularity of long head of biceps at rotator interval 13normal inferior glenohumeral ligament measures <4 mm and is best seen on coronal oblique images at the mid glenoid level; in adhesive capsulitis, the axillary recess may show thickening ≥1.3 cmjoint capsule thickening 2anterior capsule thickness >3.5 mm and abnormal hyperintensity 14abnormal soft tissue thickening within the rotator interval with signal alterationabnormal soft tissue encasing the biceps anchorvariable enhancement of the capsule and synovium within the axillary recess and rotator intervalanterior capsule thickness >3.5 mm and abnormal hyperintensity 14Other MR arthrography features include:thickening of the coracohumeral ligament (CHL) 4subcoracoid triangle sign 4Adhesive capsulitis is typically a self-limiting disease that improves over 1-2 years.
Treatment options include:physiotherapycorticosteroid injectionsglenohumeral hydrodilatationclosed manipulation under anesthesiaarthroscopic capsular release with lysis of adhesions

Adhesive otitis media is a form of chronic otitis media where there is an adhesion of medial ear structures as a result of chronic inflammation.
There are often complete or partial adhesions between the thin retracted and atrophic pars tensa and the medial wall of the middle ear.
Soft tissue debris may encase the middle ear ossicles 2.otitis media

Adie pupil (also known as tonic pupil) is caused by idiopathic degeneration of the ciliary ganglion, which sometimes occurs following a viral or bacterial illness.
It is usually unilateral and typically affects young females 1.Adie pupil represents a large dilated "tonic pupil", which does not constrict to bright light but can slowly accommodate to near objects, thereby demonstrating light-near dissociation.
It is part of the classic triad called Adie syndrome.
It was named for the British-Australian neurologist William John Adie (1886 - 1935).
Although he recognized that he was far from the first to recognize its existence, indeed James Ware published a case in 1831 2.

Adie syndrome, also known as Holmes-Adie syndrome, is a rare neurological disorder.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyHistory and etymologyReferencesAdie syndrome is a rare condition which is most commonly seen in young females in their fourth decade of life 2,3.Patients most commonly present with a classic triad of:Unilateral pupillary symptoms are more common than bilateral 2,3.
It is thought to result form damage to the ciliary ganglion and the dorsal root ganglion by viral or bacterial infections, however there are idiopathic etiologies 1,3.It was named after the British-Australian neurologist William John Adie (1886 - 1935) 1.

The ADIR (ADduction and Internal Rotation) position relates to MR arthrography of the shoulder joint.
When added to a neutral-position shoulder protocol, MR arthrography in the ADIR position facilitates the diagnosis of labroligamentous lesions in patients with recurrent shoulder dislocations, particularly anterior labroligamentous periosteal sleeve avulsion (ALPSA) lesions and possibly other types of Bankart lesions, that is the classic Bankart and Perthes lesions.
The patient's pertinent hand is placed behind the back, thereby pulling the humeral head anteroinferiorly.
This results in tensing of the posterior capsule with concurrent anterior capsule distension, which pulls contrast material into the anterior potential space.

Adjacent level ossification is a complication of anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) with anterior plate stabilization.
It represents pathological heterotopic ossification of the soft tissues above or below the ends of the plate, contiguous with the adjacent vertebral body.
It occurs particularly if the end of the plate is within 5 mm the adjacent unfused disc 1.
Generally, adjacent level ossification occurs far more frequently at the cranial adjacent segment, rather than the caudal one 1.
Although it can co-exist with adjacent segment degeneration, it is believed to be a separate process as prominent ossification can be seen in cases where the adjacent disc is normal 1.

Adjacent segment degeneration is a common complication of spinal fusion occurring at the adjacent unfused level above or below the fused segment.
It is usually encountered in the cervical spine or lumbar spine and occurs with an incidence of roughly between 2% and 4% per year 4.
The underlying etiology is multifactorial and likely represents the progression of pre-existing degenerative disease accelerated by changes in biomechanical forces due to fusion at the adjacent level.
Adjacent segment degeneration can co-exist with adjacent level ossification but is believed to be distinct from it.

The term adnexal torsion refers to torsion of the pelvic adnexal structures.
This can encompass ovarian torsion + / - tubal torsion.

Adnexa is a general term that refers to the accessory structures of an organ.
Adnexa have been described with:cutaneous/skin adnexahair follicles, sweat glands, nailsadnexa mastoideastructures in the mastoid (posterior) wall of the middle ear, e.g. mastoid antrum, aditus ad antrum, mastoid air cellsadnexa oculieyelids, lacrimal apparatusadnexa uteri (uterus)ovaries, fallopian tubes, and broad ligamentshair follicles, sweat glands, nailsstructures in the mastoid (posterior) wall of the middle ear, e.g. mastoid antrum, aditus ad antrum, mastoid air cellseyelids, lacrimal apparatusovaries, fallopian tubes, and broad ligamentsIn general radiological use, the term is often (incorrectly) used synonymously with the ovary, an adnexal structure of the uterus.
It is an unusual word (for English-speakers) as it has an identical spelling and pronunciation whether used in a singular or plural sense.
Therefore the terms 'adnexus/adnexum' for a single adnexa or 'adnexae' for more than one adnexa are incorrect, and should not be used.
The adjectival form for adnexa is adnexal.
The term adnexitis is sometimes used for an inflammation of the adnexa uteri.
"Adnexa" derives from the Latin adnectere ("to tie together").

Adrenal abscesses are rare lesions affecting the adrenal glands and are usually encountered in the setting of disseminated infection.
Although cases have been described in both neonates and adults, no systematic literature is available on the epidemiology of adrenal abscesses.
Haematogenous seeding of the adrenal gland is the most likely cause of an adrenal abscess.
Infections from a range of organisms including Streptococcus pneumoniae and Norcardia spp.
have been reported 1,2.CT may show an inhomogeneous mass (owing to areas of necrosis within the abscess) that may rapidly increase in size.
A rapid increase in the size of the lesion differentiates it from an adrenal tumor 3.

Adrenal adenomas (a.k.a.
adenomata) are the most common adrenal lesion and are often found incidentally during abdominal imaging for other reasons.
In all cases, but especially in the setting of known current or previous malignancy, adrenal adenomas need to be distinguished from adrenal metastases or other adrenal malignancies.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe term incidental adrenal lesion/nodule (also colloquially known as an incidentaloma) is sometimes used interchangeably with adrenal adenoma, although in truth an incidental adrenal lesion includes all pathologies (including malignancies).
As such, the term should be avoided lest it results in confusion.
Adrenal adenomas are found in almost all age groups but increase in frequency with age 4.The majority (~95%) of adrenal adenomas are non-functioning, in which case they are asymptomatic.
If found incidentally, please refer to the Management of incidental adrenal masses: American College of Radiology white paper.
Patients with hyperfunctioning adrenal gland adenomas present with manifestations of excess hormone secretion.
The most common disease states caused by functioning adenomas are Cushing syndrome (due to excess cortisol production), Conn syndrome (due to excess aldosterone production) or sex hormone-related symptoms 4.Imaging plays a key role in assessing the vast number of incidental adrenal lesions, the majority of which are adrenal adenomas.
Correlation with previous imaging is often useful, as a lesion which has not changed over some years is unlikely to be malignant.
Adrenal adenomas can be divided into those with a typical or an atypical appearance.
Typical adenomas are:small: <3 cmhomogeneous and low densityAtypical features include:hemorrhagecalcificationnecrosislack or paucity of fatlargeif >4 cm: 70% malignant (excluding adrenal myelolipomas which are easily recognized due to fat, and pheochromocytomas which are usually recognized biochemically)if >6 cm: 85% malignant 4if >4 cm: 70% malignant (excluding adrenal myelolipomas which are easily recognized due to fat, and pheochromocytomas which are usually recognized biochemically)if >6 cm: 85% malignant 4CT is often the modality which identifies an adrenal mass.
Fortunately, density evaluation of an adrenal lesion is highly sensitive and specific as 70% of adrenal adenomas contain significant intracellular fat.
Lipid-poor adenomas are more difficult to diagnose as the CT density increases and approaches that of soft tissue density.
For lipid-poor lesions, the contrast washout rate can be calculated using CT.
Adenomas typically have rapid contrast washout, whereas non-adenomas tend to wash out more slowly.
There are different protocols, and some controversy exists as to which protocol is the best.
A 5 or 10-minute protocol may be more suitable for busy CT lists.
However, there is evidence that a 15 minutes post contrast protocol has better diagnostic accuracy 11.non-contrast imaging 4<0 HU: considered 47% sensitive and 100% specific<10 HU: considered 71% sensitive and 98% specificwashout imaging15 minutes post-contrast>60% absolute washout>40% relative washout<0 HU: considered 47% sensitive and 100% specific<10 HU: considered 71% sensitive and 98% specific15 minutes post-contrast>60% absolute washout>40% relative washoutIt is important to note that hypervascular metastases may show identical washout values, particularly those from renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma.
An alternative diagnosis to adrenal adenoma must be considered when there is a value >120 HU on the portal venous phase, particularly in cases with a prior history of neoplasm 12.Chemical shift imaging is the most reliable for diagnosis especially when CT findings are equivocal.
Because of the high sensitivity of chemical shift MR imaging to minute amounts of intravoxel (i.e. intracellular) fat, MR imaging demonstrates signal dropout on opposed-phase images in the majority of adenomas, and a drop in signal intensity of >16.5% is considered diagnostic for an adenoma 17.
Rather than measuring the signal, one can compare the adenoma in and out of phase, with images windowed identically, a visible loss of signal is diagnostic of an adenoma 17.
Do not use the liver as a reference, as it can change in signal between in- and out-of-phase imaging, depending on the presence of hemochromatosis or hepatic steatosis 4.As MRIs are usually performed to help define indeterminate adrenal lesions seen on CT, the sensitivity and specificity depend on the CT density.
MRI is useful for adrenal masses with an attenuation <30 HU.
Signal dropout on out-of-phase imaging for:10-30 HU on CT is 89% sensitive and 100% specific10-20 HU on CT is 100% sensitive and 100% specificFat-containing metastases (e.g. hepatocellular carcinoma, renal cell carcinoma) can demonstrate loss of signal similar to adenomas 17.
Malignant adrenal lesions also demonstrate restricted diffusion 4.Small adrenal masses with manifestations of hormonal excess require resection, as do large (>3-5 cm) non-functioning adrenal mass lesions, as they are considered potentially malignant (see adrenal carcinoma).A small adrenal lesion with typical features of an adenoma and without biochemical abnormality can be safely left in situ.
Some studies demonstrate that up to 40% of adenomas may grow and approximately 10% have been shown to resolve 14.In patients with a known malignancy, ~50% of non-specific adrenal nodules will represent adrenal adenomas.
Consider other adrenal lesions such as:adrenal cortical carcinomapheochromocytomaadrenal metastasisfocal adrenal granulomatous diseaseadrenal myelolipomasmall (<3 cm), homogeneous, and low density (<10 HU) are leave-alone lesionsif >120 HU on the portal venous phase, the washout value should be ignored, as the lesion is most likely a hypervascular metastasis or pheochromocytoma rather than a lipid-poor adenomasmall (<3 cm), homogeneous, and low density (<10 HU) are leave-alone lesionsif >120 HU on the portal venous phase, the washout value should be ignored, as the lesion is most likely a hypervascular metastasis or pheochromocytoma rather than a lipid-poor adenoma

An adrenal collision tumor or collision tumor of the adrenal gland is an uncommon condition where two histologically distinct tumors abut each other or are in close proximity in the same adrenal gland.
PathologyClinical significanceRadiographic assessmentDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresCollision tumors have been reported in nearly every organ, for example, collision tumor of the ovary.
They may be composed of two primary tumors derived from the same organ, or a primary tumor and a metastasis.
Given the high prevalence of adrenal adenoma, this is unsurprisingly the most often encountered component in adrenal collision tumors.
In terms of classification, collision tumors need to be distinguished from a composite tumor, where two different histologic types are intermixed.
The close approximation of two tumors not intermixed at their interface can create both diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties.
A mixed benign and malignant collision tumor can render the malignant component unidentifiable on biopsy, with suboptimal or inappropriate treatment being the obvious consequence.
It is, therefore, crucial to ensure that the lesion suspicious for malignancy be sampled amply.
It has been demonstrated that 18F-FDG PET, CT and MRI are all capable of readily distinguishing the two separate components of collision tumors within the adrenal gland.
Chemical shift MRI may help in differentiating between benign lipid-poor adenomas and malignant tumors.
In the case of one component being an adrenal adenoma, definitive diagnosis of this component should be straightforward, given the high diagnostic accuracy of the aforementioned modalities for this lesion.
For a heterogeneous appearing adrenal mass consider:hemorrhage into a pre-existing non-collision adrenal tumor 3adrenal adenomaadrenal myelolipomaadrenal carcinomaadrenal metastases and lymphoma

The adrenal glands are supplied by three adrenal (suprarenal) arteries: superior adrenal artery: arises from ipsilateral inferior phrenic arterymiddle adrenal artery: arises from lateral side of abdominal aortainferior adrenal artery: arises from the ipsilateral renal artery

Adrenal calcification is not a rare finding in healthy asymptomatic people and is usually the result of previous hemorrhage or tuberculosis.
Addison disease patients only occasionally develop calcification.
PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuressepsis: Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndromeblunt abdominal traumaadrenal pseudocystneonatal asphyxiacoagulopathyinfants: calcification seen soon after hemorrhage (as early as 1-2 weeks)tuberculosishistoplasmosishydatid diseaseadrenal metastases, especially melanomaneuroblastomaadrenal myelolipomaadrenal adenomaadrenocortical carcinomapheochromocytomaadrenal dermoid cyst 4Addison disease uncommon in primary Addison disease; calcification suggests an underlying cause (e.g. infection)Wolman diseaseuncommon in primary Addison disease; calcification suggests an underlying cause (e.g. infection)Adrenal calcification is best assessed on CT where it can be differentiated from a calcified adrenal mass or lesion.
CT also allows simultaneous characterization of any underlying lesions with size, density, enhancement, and washout.
In children, neuroblastoma has been reported as the commonest calcifying adrenal mass 4.
In adults, simple calcified cysts have been reported as common adrenal masses, characteristically showing peripheral curvilinear calcification.
Post-hemorrhage calcification is usually seen after the initial adrenal hematoma has resolved and, hence, is not usually seen with an adrenal lesion.
However, adrenal metastases such as from bronchogenic tumors can present with hemorrhage, making the diagnosis challenging.adrenal glandsCushing syndrome

Primary adrenal cortical carcinoma is a highly malignant but rare neoplasm.
It may present as a hormonally active or an inactive tumor.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAlthough men and women are affected equally, functioning tumors are more common in females, who are also more likely to have an associated endocrine syndrome 5.
The median age of presentation is around 50 years, but tumors have been found at all ages 3,4.An additional, but smaller, incidence peak occurs in early childhood.
In these cases, tumors are more likely to be functioning 5.
Incidence is low, ranging from 0.6 to 1.67 per million, per year 5.
Hormonally inactive tumors present as palpable masses, abdominal pain or with evidence of metastasis.
Hormonally active tumors, representing 30-40% of all adult tumors, present with characteristic clinical manifestations 3-5:Cushing syndrome secondary to elevated cortisol (most common)virilisation or feminization secondary to elevated androgensConn syndrome secondary to hyperaldosteronism (rare)Beckwith-Wiedemann syndromeLi-Fraumeni syndromeCarney complexmultiple endocrine neoplasia type 1familial adenomatous polyposis 9Often a suprarenal well-defined mass is seen, the appearance of which varies based on the size of the lesion.
Smaller lesions are homogenous, whereas larger lesions are heterogeneous secondary to necrosis/hemorrhage.
CT is usually the first imaging modality used.tend to be large (>6 cm)irregularly-shapedcentral areas of necrosis and hemorrhage, resulting in variable enhancementrelative contrast retention (washout <40%) on delayed contrast-enhanced CT 7calcification is seen in up to 30% of casesrelative contrast retention (washout <40%) on delayed contrast-enhanced CT 7If the mass is found early, when still small, then it is difficult to distinguish from an adenoma, as aggressive features are often absent 5.Focal extension into renal vein, IVC and liver are relatively common, with some series finding renal vein involvement in up to 40% of patients 5.
Metastasis to regional lymph nodes, lung, bones, and liver can occur.
Liver metastases tend to be hypervascular.
MRI can be useful to determine hepatic invasion if CT is inconclusive.
Heterogeneous mass is seen that is of high signal on T2 sequences.
Areas of hemorrhage may result in variable signal intensity dependent on the age of the hemorrhage.
Heterogeneous enhancement is seen with administration of gadolinium 1,4.Arteriography may be performed in patients who present with a large mass for which the organ of origin cannot be determined 3.
Selective catheterization can identify the primary vascular supply, and thus help distinguish adrenal from renal tumors.
Ideally, treatment is with surgical excision, however, in many instances, the disease is advanced at the time of diagnosis, in which case chemotherapy (Mitotane) and radiation may be given for palliation.
In general, males have a poorer prognosis, largely because they are less likely to have functioning tumors, and thus present later, with more advanced disease 5.
For an adrenal mass consider other adrenal lesions 2:adrenal metastasesknown primary neoplasm adrenal adenomaadrenal hemorrhagepheochromocytomamay look identical on imagingdifferentiation is on histology, biochemistry and functional statusknown primary neoplasm may look identical on imagingdifferentiation is on histology, biochemistry and functional statuspercutaneous fine needle aspiration (FNA) of adrenal cortical carcinoma is unreliable for establishing the diagnosis 8the most specific indications of adrenal cortical carcinoma are metastases and local invasion

Adrenal gland trauma most commonly results from blunt force trauma.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsReferencesCases and figuresAdrenal gland trauma is present on 1-2% of CT imaging in blunt trauma although the occurrence is thought to be much higher as injury has been demonstrated at 28% in one autopsy series 1-4.
The right adrenal gland is more commonly affected than the left with a ratio of 3-4:1 2.
Adrenal hemorrhage is the most common injury to the adrenal gland and is thought to be a result of direct compression or increased venous pressures from IVC compression.
Laceration of the adrenal gland is less common 2,3.
Isolated adrenal gland trauma is uncommon (<5% of all adrenal trauma 4) and associated injuries include 1,2:pulmonary contusions, pneumothorax and/or hemothoraxliver, spleen and/or renal lacerationrib, pelvic or spinal fractureshead injuryAdrenal gland traumatic hemorrhage may also present with 1: posterior pararenal space hemorrhageIVC compressionpsoas muscle hematomathickening of the diaphragmatic crushematoma presents as a well-defined nodular mass, within either the body or the limb with a density of 50-80 HU 1,2diffuse enlargement or replacement of the adrenal gland with less well-defined borders can also be seen and most often relates to laceration 1,2periadrenal fat stranding is often present 1T1: hematoma is isointense to muscle, liver, renal cortexT2: hematoma is very hyperintense; hyperintense fat stranding 3Adrenal gland trauma is important to recognize as mortality is twice as high in blunt trauma patients with adrenal gland injury than without 2.
Complications include 1,4:acute adrenal insufficiency (if bilateral)delayed hemorrhagecalcificationpseudocyst formationthrombus from IVC compression (rare)Differentials to consider include:pre-existing adrenal masshemorrhage into existing adrenal tumoradrenal gland hyperenhancement: usually bilateral with preserved adrenal gland morphology and in the setting of hypotensionThe presence of a discrete adrenal mass in the context of blunt trauma without injury to other abdominal organs or CT features of injury warrants follow-up investigation 1,4.

Adrenal cysts are rare lesions and are commonly incidental findings.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAdrenal cysts are reported to be rare with an incidence of <1% 1.
Patients can present with pain or swelling, although a significant portion (~40%) are incidental findings 1,3.
Adrenal cysts can be divided into four categories 1-3:pseudocystsendothelial cystsepithelial cystsincluding adult polycystic kidney disease (single case report) 4parasitic cysts, usually hydatidincluding adult polycystic kidney disease (single case report) 4Small adrenal cysts may be difficult to differentiate from adrenal adenomas on unenhanced CT as they may both have densities in the pure fluid range, i.e. -10 to +10.
However on post-contrast CT adrenal adenomas tend to enhance, whereas cysts do not 5.
cystic adrenal neoplasms

Despite its small size, the adrenal gland is affected by a relatively large number of neoplastic entities:adrenal adenomaadrenal myelolipomaadrenal cortical carcinomaadrenal pheochromocytomaadrenal neuroblastomaadrenal metastasesadrenal lesions: for a more general list of adrenal masses

The adrenal (suprarenal) glands (often shortened to just the adrenals) are paired organs of the endocrine system, often asymmetric in shape.
Gross anatomyBlood supplyLymphatic drainageInnervationVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresEach gland is enclosed in the perirenal fascia and each has a body and two limbs: a medial limb and a lateral limb.
However, the right adrenal gland is usually more pyramidal in shape while the left adrenal gland is more crescentic 7.
The right adrenal gland has a maximum width of 6.1 mm and the left adrenal gland has a maximum width of 7.9 mm 6.
Proportionately, the adrenal size is larger in neonates and infants, being almost one-third of the size of the kidney 2-4.
The adrenal gland consists of two portions: an outer cortex and an inner medulla.
The gland is covered by a collagenous capsule.
The cortex is subdivided into three zones (from outer to inner) 5,7:The medulla (chromaffin cells) produces catecholamines (epinephrine, norepinephrine) as well as dopamine.
The adrenal glands lie superior and anteromedial to the kidneys.medial: right crus of the diaphragm, right inferior phrenic arterylateral: right lobe (bare area) of the liveranterior: inferior vena cava (IVC)posterior: right kidney 3,6,7medial: left crus of the diaphragm, left inferior phrenic arteryanteromedial: diaphragmanterior: lesser sac, stomach, splenic artery, pancreasposterior: left kidney 3,6,7arterial supply is via three adrenal arteries 5superior adrenal artery (from inferior phrenic artery)middle adrenal artery (from abdominal aorta)inferior adrenal artery (from renal artery)venous drainage 5adrenal veins emerge from the hilum and drain to different veins depending on the side:left adrenal vein drains to the left renal veinright adrenal gland drains to the IVCsuperior adrenal artery (from inferior phrenic artery)middle adrenal artery (from abdominal aorta)inferior adrenal artery (from renal artery)adrenal veins emerge from the hilum and drain to different veins depending on the side:left adrenal vein drains to the left renal veinright adrenal gland drains to the IVCleft adrenal vein drains to the left renal veinright adrenal gland drains to the IVClymphatics are contained within the capsule and drain to the para-aortic nodes 7,9post synaptic fibers from celiac, aorticorenal and renal gangliapresynaptic fibers from abdominopelvic splanchnic nerves 7lying down adrenal sign 8takes on a flattened appearanceoften in the presence of a pelvic kidney or renal agenesisadrenal gland hypoplasia or agenesis 8accessory adrenal restsoften near adrenal glands but may be found anywhere in the abdomen, pelvis or scrotum 9horseshoe adrenal glandtakes on a flattened appearanceoften in the presence of a pelvic kidney or renal agenesisoften near adrenal glands but may be found anywhere in the abdomen, pelvis or scrotum 9anterior transverse scanning is the best approach but the adrenal glands are often difficult to see 6:left adrenal gland seen ~40% at least once during scanright adrenal gland seen ~80% at least once during scanleft adrenal gland is more difficult to visualize than the right because it is often posterior to the stomach and obscured by gas; this can be overcome by 6intercostal scanning in the posterior axillary linescanning through the spleen and left kidney with the left side of the patient elevatedleft adrenal gland seen ~40% at least once during scanright adrenal gland seen ~80% at least once during scanintercostal scanning in the posterior axillary linescanning through the spleen and left kidney with the left side of the patient elevatedThe adrenal glands enhance after contrast administration to approximately 50-60 HU.
Hyperenhancement of the adrenal gland is concerning for hypovolemic shock.located superior and anteromedial to the upper pole of the right kidneyappears as a linear, V-shape or comma-shape 1located superior and anteromedial to the upper pole of the left kidneyappears as a triangular or Y-shape 1adrenal gland traumaadrenal hemorrhageadrenal calcificationtumors of the adrenal glandadrenal hyperplasia

Adrenal hemangiomas are rare benign tumors that are usually incidentally identified (one example of an adrenal incidentaloma).
Its significance mainly relates to the difficulty in differentiation from other malignant lesions.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAlthough these can be found at any age, they are most commonly encountered 40-70 years of age and are more common in women with a female:male ratio of approximately 2:1 3.
Adrenal hemangiomas are usually incidentally identified when the region is imaged for other reasons.
On occasions, these lesions may hemorrhage 2-4.
Bilateral adrenal hemangiomas have only been reported a few times 6.
Usually, no abnormality can be detected, although if very large the mass or its effects on surrounding structures may be appreciable.
Phleboliths or dystrophic calcification are visible in up to two-thirds of cases 5-6.Ultrasound features are non-specific demonstrating a mass of variable size and variable echotexture.
Typically adrenal hemangiomas are soft tissue attenuation masses, varying in size from a few centimeters to as large as 25 cm 3.
The larger masses frequently have areas of calcification representing either phleboliths or dystrophic calcification in areas of previous hemorrhage 1-3.
With administration of contrast they enhance similarly to hemangiomas elsewhere 1,3-4,6:heterogeneousmainly peripheralgradual filling in over time is sometimes seen, but less frequently than in the livercentral region is often scarred and does not significantly enhancetending to remain isodense to the aorta on all phasesMRI is often helpful, demonstrates lesions that are 1:T1hypointense relative to livercentral intrinsic hyperintensity may be present due to hemorrhageT2very hyperintense peripherallycentral scar hypointenseT1 C+ (Gad)peripheral enhancement which persistsgradual filling is sometimes seenhypointense relative to livercentral intrinsic hyperintensity may be present due to hemorrhagevery hyperintense peripherallycentral scar hypointenseperipheral enhancement which persistsgradual filling is sometimes seenUnfortunately, it is difficult to exclude malignancy based on imaging or even biopsy, and as such, some authors recommend all suspected adrenal hemangiomas to be excised, which is curative.
Others recommend excision of only large or symptomatic tumors or those with imaging features which raise the possibility of malignancy 1,3,6.Excision may either be traditional open adrenalectomy or laparoscopic adrenalectomy.
Essentially the differential is that of any solid adrenal lesions, including:adrenal adenomaadrenal cortical carcinomapheochromocytomaneuroblastoma (in children)ganglioneuromaadrenal myelolipoma (usually has macroscopic fat)adrenal metastasesadrenal abscess

Adrenal hemorrhage can result from a variety of traumatic and non-traumatic causes.
When unilateral, it is often clinically silent.
In contrast, bilateral adrenal hemorrhage can lead to catastrophic adrenal insufficiency.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe large majority of patients with unilateral adrenal hemorrhage do not have clinically obvious signs of adrenal insufficiency and the diagnosis is usually made incidentally at imaging performed for another reason.
Bilateral hemorrhage often results in an adrenal crisis, with coma and death resulting if steroid replacement therapy is not administered promptly.
Despite treatment, overall there is approximately a 15% mortality, and about 50% when in the setting of sepsis.
Adrenal hemorrhage can be either unilateral or bilateral.
Adrenal gland trauma is a common cause of unilateral adrenal hemorrhage.
On the other hand, bilateral adrenal hemorrhage is rarely due to trauma and is frequently attributed to adrenal vein spasm or thrombosis.
Predisposing risk factors include:sepsis, especially meningococcaemia (also known as Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome)disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)primary antiphospholipid syndromeheparin-induced thrombocytopeniasteroid usageanticoagulationunderlying adrenal tumorin neonates (birth trauma, sepsis, hypoxia, adrenal insufficiency, hemorrhagic disorders and diabetic mothers) 7,8thromboembolic disease 9The pattern of echogenicity of an adrenal hematoma depends on its age:an early-stage hematoma appears solid with diffuse or inhomogeneous echogenicityas liquefaction occurs, the mass demonstrates mixed echogenicity with a central hypoechoic region and eventually becomes completely anechoic and cyst-likecalcification may be seen in the walls of the hematoma as early as 1-2 weeks after onset and gradually compact as the blood is absorbedColor Doppler and power Doppler imaging confirm that the mass is avascular.
Adrenal hematomas characteristically appear round or oval, often with surrounding stranding of the periadrenal fat evident.
Attenuation value of an adrenal hematoma depends on its age:acute to subacute hematomas contain areas of high attenuation that usually range from 50-90 HUadrenal hematomas decrease in size and attenuation over time, and most resolve completelyorganized chronic adrenal hematoma appears as a mass with a hypoattenuating center, with or without calcifications (also known as adrenal pseudocysts)adrenal hematomas may calcify after one yearacute stage (<7 days after onset): the hematoma typically appears isointense or slightly hypointense on T1 weighted images and markedly hypointense on T2 weighted imagessubacute stage (7 days to 7 weeks after onset): the hematoma appears hyperintense on T1 and T2 weighted imageschronic stage (typically >7 weeks after onset): a hypointense rim is present on T1 and T2 weighted images, which is attributed to hemosiderin deposition and the presence of a fibrous capsulein neonates neuroblastomaliver metastasisvascularitycongenital adrenal hyperplasiabilateralglands are enlarged and have a cerebriform contourin adults if only limited images of the upper abdomen are available, it may be difficult to differentiate a rim-calcified hematoma from a splenic artery aneurysmneuroblastomaliver metastasisvascularitycongenital adrenal hyperplasiabilateralglands are enlarged and have a cerebriform contourliver metastasisvascularitybilateralglands are enlarged and have a cerebriform contourif only limited images of the upper abdomen are available, it may be difficult to differentiate a rim-calcified hematoma from a splenic artery aneurysmadrenal gland traumaadrenal glandsadrenal lesionsadrenal calcificationadrenal adenomaadrenal carcinomaCushing syndromefetal adrenal hemorrhagebilateral adrenal enlargement

Adrenal lesions cover a broad spectrum from benign to neoplastic entities.
Due to increased use of cross-sectional imaging they are frequently detected as incidental lesions (incidentalomas).
If found incidentally, please refer to the Management of Incidental Adrenal Masses: American College of Radiology White Paper 9.Radiology plays a significant role in differentiation.
Cross-sectional imaging is the mainstay of imaging for identifying and assessing adrenal lesions, for which an algorithm to aid characterization is helpful 5.adrenal adenoma: most common lesion detected on CT 5,6adrenal metastasispheochromocytomaasymmetric adrenal cortical hyperplasiaadrenal granulomatous disease tuberculosishistoplasmosisadrenal myelolipomatuberculosishistoplasmosisadrenal cortical carcinomapheochromocytomaneuroblastomaganglioneuroblastomaganglioneuromaadrenal myelolipomaadrenal metastasisadrenal hemorrhageadrenal abscessadrenal hemangiomaadrenal cyst adrenal pseudocystadrenal endothelial cystadrenal epithelial cystadrenal parasitic cyst​adrenal cortical adenoma with low density 8adrenal pseudocystadrenal endothelial cystadrenal epithelial cystadrenal parasitic cystadrenal lymphangiomaadrenal haemangiosarcomaadrenal lymphomaadrenal hemorrhageadrenal teratomaextramedullary hematopoiesis in adrenal gland 7adrenal calcificationWolman diseaseWolman diseasetumors of the adrenal glandbilateral adrenal enlargement

Adrenal hyperplasia refers to non-malignant growth (enlargement) of the adrenal glands and is a rare cause of ACTH-independent Cushing syndrome, with unilateral adrenal cortical adenomas being the commonest.
Approximately 20% of Conn syndrome cases are secondary to adrenal hyperplasia.
In diffuse hyperplasia, the limbs of the adrenal glands are >5 cm in length and >10 mm in thickness.
It may be unilateral in some situations 6.PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAdrenal hyperplasia can be classified according to:inheritancecongenitalcongenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)primary pigmented nodular adrenal dysplasiaacquired adrenal hyperplasiamorphologymicronodular adrenal hyperplasiamacronodular adrenal hyperplasiaadrenocorticotropin independent macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (AIMAH) congenitalcongenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)primary pigmented nodular adrenal dysplasiaacquired adrenal hyperplasiacongenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)primary pigmented nodular adrenal dysplasiamicronodular adrenal hyperplasiamacronodular adrenal hyperplasiaadrenocorticotropin independent macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (AIMAH) adrenocorticotropin independent macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (AIMAH) enlarged limbs of one or both adrenal glands >10 mm thicknormal adrenal morphology maintainednodular or uniformhigh lipid content and thus may demonstrate signal dropout on out-of-phase chemical shift imagingsignal dropout due to lipid content overlaps with adrenal cortical adenomasbilateral adrenal enlargement

Adrenal insufficiency refers to inadequate secretion of corticosteroids (glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids).TerminologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresIt may occur from partial or complete destruction of the adrenal cortex, in which case it is termed primary adrenal insufficiency (also known as Addison disease).
Secondary adrenal insufficiency due to lack of stimulation of the gland is a more common etiology overall.
Depends on the course of the disease:acute stage: the patient presents with fever, back pain, hypotension, weaknesschronic stage: progressive lethargy, weakness, cutaneous pigmentation, weight losschemistry: hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, azotemia, hypercalcemia, hypoglycemiaadrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test:primary adrenal insufficiencycortisol levels fail to rise after synthetic ACTH stimulation due to the destruction of the adrenal cortexsecondary adrenal insufficiencycortisol levels rise after synthetic ACTH stimulationthis indicates decreased ACTH secretion due to pituitary dysfunctionprimary adrenal insufficiencycortisol levels fail to rise after synthetic ACTH stimulation due to the destruction of the adrenal cortexsecondary adrenal insufficiencycortisol levels rise after synthetic ACTH stimulationthis indicates decreased ACTH secretion due to pituitary dysfunctioncortisol levels fail to rise after synthetic ACTH stimulation due to the destruction of the adrenal cortexcortisol levels rise after synthetic ACTH stimulationthis indicates decreased ACTH secretion due to pituitary dysfunctionidiopathic autoimmune disorders are the most common cause in developed countries (80% of cases) 1granulomatous disease: tuberculosis (the most common infectious cause in developing countries) and sarcoidosisneoplasms: metastases (e.g. lung, ovary, kidney, melanoma), lymphoma, and leukemiaadrenal hemorrhage: shock, sepsis (Waterhouse-Friderichsen syndrome), coagulation disorders, antiphospholipid syndrome, trauma 5systemic fungal infection: histoplasmosis (most common in the southeastern and south-central United States 1)adrenoleukodystrophycongenital adrenal hyperplasia 6drugs inhibiting steroidogenesis 7bilateral adrenalectomy 8suppression of the adrenal axis by endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoidshypothalamic or pituitary lesionsThe disease course may be either acute, subacute, or chronic 2:acute: occurs within a few weeks to months and is caused by bilateral adrenal hemorrhage (adrenal apoplexy) or secondary to shock and sepsis or trauma (Addisonian crisis)subacute disease (adrenalitis): when the disease has been present for less than two yearschronic: secondary to chronic autoimmune disorder or chronic granulomatous infection (tuberculosis)the adrenal glands become atrophic and calcifiedthe adrenal glands become atrophic and calcifiedAdrenal insufficiency is a bilateral process that cannot be diagnosed by imaging alone.
CT would be the best imaging modality for adrenal assessment but is not necessary for diagnosis.
Imaging features depend on the cause and the course of the disease either acute, subacute or chronic:acute: bilateral adrenal hematomassubacute (adrenalitis): enlargement of both adrenal glands, with necrotic centers and peripheral enhancing rimschronic: both adrenal glands appear small and atrophic, associated with calcifications (adrenal calcification) in granulomatous adrenalitisacute: glucocorticoid therapy, volume, and electrolyte replacement chronic: glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid replacementadrenal metastasis and adrenal lymphomaadrenal hemorrhageadrenal adenoma

An adrenal lipoma is an extremely rare macroscopic fat containing adrenal lesion.
with only a handful of cases described in literature 1.PathologyRadiographic featuresDiffernential diagnosisSee also ReferencesLike other lipomas elsehwre in the body, they are benign tumors of mesenchymal origin that contain mature fatty tissue and are surrounded by a fibrous capsule.
Appears as a well-circumscribed, homogeneous, fatty lesion with minimal or no soft-tissue attenuation / signal within the lesion.
For macroscopic fat containing adrenal lesions consideradrenal myelolipoma: most common macroscopic fat containing adrenal lesion.fat containing adrenal lesions

Adrenal lymphangiomas, also known as cystic adrenal lymphangiomas, are rare, benign cystic adrenal lesions.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesAdrenal lymphangiomas are extremely rare; prevalence is estimated at 0.06% 8.
They can occur at any age, with a peak incidence between the 3rd and 6th decades of life.
According to one series, there may be a slight right-sided and female predilection 3.They usually remain asymptomatic throughout life and are almost always incidentally detected.
Rarely, patients may have abdominal pain 3.They supposedly occur as a result of a developmental abnormality of lymphatic channels 4.Their appearance is that of a lymphangioma occurring anywhere else in the body, i.e. a multilocular cyst.
D2-40 cytoplasmic staining tends to be positive (for lining of lymphatic vessels) 6,8AE1/AE3 staining tends to be negative 6typically seen as cystic lobulated lesions of fluid attenuation with thin enhancing walls 7-8tend to present as relatively large lesions with an average size around 3 cm 6internal septations may be present, and when present, enhance after contrast administrationmay have calcifications, which tend to present in one of two patterns: thick curvilinear or scattered punctate, and can involve the septation(s) 7They are benign lesions, although if they become symptomatic, surgical resection is warranted.
Unnecessary surgery, on the other hand, can be the ultimate consequence of unfamiliarity with these rare lesions.
The differential diagnosis for adrenal lymphangiomas is that of adrenal cystic tumors, most of which are rare in themselves, and includes:adrenal cystadrenal hemangiomacystic pheochromocytomaschwannoma with cystic degenerationcystic adenoma 9metastatic adenocarcinomas 10adrenal hydatid cyst 11

Adrenal lymphoma can refer toprimary adrenal lymphoma: rare can be bilateral in around 70% of cases 1secondary involvement of the adrenal glands with lymphoma: more commoncan be bilateral in around 70% of cases 1Can be variable and can include adrenal insufficiency, worsening general state, weight loss and abdominal pain.
Maybe seen as bulky adrenal masses.
Often difficult to use bilaterality to differentiate primary versus secondary since the former can be bilateral in a considerable portion of cases.
Usually of soft tissue attenuation (40-60 HU) with mild progressive enhancement after contrast medium administration 9.often FDG avid 6

Adrenal metastases are the most common malignant lesions involving the adrenal gland.
Metastases are usually bilateral but may also be unilateral.
Unilateral involvement is more prevalent on the left side (ratio of 1.5:1).EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThey are present at autopsy in up to 27% of patients with known malignant epithelial tumors.
Many primary tumors can potentially metastasize to the adrenal glands, commonly:lung cancercolorectal carcinoma breast cancerpancreatic cancer Other reported primary tumors include:renal cell carcinomahepatocellular carcinoma 3malignant melanomaendometrial adenocarcinoma 7ovarian carcinoma 8prostatic cancer 9gastric cancer 10cholangiocarcinoma 11esophageal adenocarcinoma 12bladder carcinoma 13osteogenic osteosarcoma (rare) 14papillary thyroid carcinoma (rare)15testicular cancer 16Adrenal metastases can have a variable CT appearances 4.
They usually demonstrate less than 50% washout.
In patients with renal cell carcinoma and hepatocellular carcinoma who undergo dedicated adrenal CT imaging for known adrenal lesions, the enhancement washout of adrenal metastases can be similar to that of lipid-poor adrenal adenomas.
As hypervascular lesions, they commonly show intense enhancement on the portal venous phase, usually more than 120 HU, and thus can be easily identified.
Exact signal characteristics can vary depending on the type of tumor.
In general, commonly described signal characteristics include:T1: usually exhibit low signal intensity 2T2:  often show high signal intensity 2T1 C+ (Gd): usually has progressive enhancement after administration of contrast material 2An important diagnostic feature is the lack of signal loss on out-of-phase images (in contradistinction to that seen with adrenal adenoma).on CT, metastases usually demonstrate less than 50% washoutif intense enhancement of more than 120 HU is identified in the portal venous phase, washout should be ignored, and a hypervascular lesion such as renal cell carcinoma or hepatocellular carcinoma metastasis should be considered as a primaryMRI: no signal loss on out-of-phase images

Adrenal myelolipomas are rare, benign and usually asymptomatic tumors of the adrenal gland characterized by the predominance of mature adipocytes.
On imaging, they usually present as large masses with a variable amount of fat-containing components.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisRare tumors with estimated autopsy prevalence of 0.1-0.2%.
They are usually identified in adults, either incidentally or if complicated by hemorrhage (see below).
There is no gender predilection 9.
Most lesions are asymptomatic 6 and may be discovered incidentally when the region is imaged for other reasons (i.e. an incidentaloma).
Larger lesions (typically over 4 cm in size) can present with an acute retroperitoneal hemorrhage, and still others (especially when very large) with vague mass-related symptoms 9.
There may be a right-sided predilection 5.Although the tumor itself is non-functioning there is a relatively high incidence (10%) of associated endocrine disorders 9: Cushing syndromecongenital adrenal hyperplasia (21-hydroxylase deficiency)Conn syndrome (primary hyperaldosteronism)rarely it can present in extra-adrenal locations16Histological examination demonstrates variable amounts of:mature adipocytes (with distended lipid vacuoles) similar to bone marrowhematopoietic cells (including cells from myeloid, erythroid and megakaryocytic cell lines)The fatty component is often the predominant feature and therefore the most characteristic feature on imaging.
The lesions can infrequently contain bone 10 or show partial replacement by hemorrhage or fibrosis.
Exact sonographic appearances are varied depending on individual tumor components 1.
Usually is seen as a heterogeneous mass of mixed hyper- and hypoechoic components with the former primarily resulting from fatty portions.
The CT appearance is usually characteristic.
The typical adrenal myelolipoma appears as an adrenal lesion with fat-containing components.
The mass is usually relatively well circumscribed, however masses that are mostly fat may be difficult to separate from surrounding retroperitoneal fat.
The amount of fatty component is variable, ranging from only a few small regions in an otherwise mostly soft tissue density mass (10%) to masses made up of roughly equal components of fat and soft tissue (50%) or almost completely composed of fatty tissue (40%) 9.
The soft tissue and fatty components can be sufficiently mixed in some cases to render the mass a density similar to fluid.
Small punctate calcifications may be seen in 25-30% of cases 4,9.
If hemorrhage is present then regions of higher attenuation may be seen.
This is more frequently seen in large lesions (>10 cm) 3.T1: typically hyperintense due to fat contentsT1 (FS): typically shows fat suppressionT2: generally intermediate to hyperintense but can sometimes vary depending on contents (especially blood products) T1 C+ (Gd): shows striking enhancement 1in and out of phase: in masses with mixed components, out of phase imaging may demonstrate signal loss as the microscopic fat cells usually have little intracellular water 9,11Adrenal myelolipomas typically do not demonstrate avid FDG uptake and it is generally lower than that of the liver background.
However, in rare cases the adenomatous and hematopoietic elements can show an increased FDG uptake 12,13.They are benign lesions histologically and there is currently no recognized malignant potential 5.
As such, if imaging features are characteristic and the lesion is small, no treatment is required.
If imaging findings are indeterminate, percutaneous biopsy can be performed.
In larger lesions or where hemorrhage has occurred surgical excision is curative.
General imaging differential considerations include:retroperitoneal liposarcomafat-containing adrenocortical carcinomalipid-rich adrenal adenomaadrenal teratoma: extremely rarerenal angiomyolipoma (AML)CT coronal reconstruction or MRI can help in determining the kidney as the origin of the lesionadrenal angiomyolipoma 14adrenal lipoma: very rareextra adrenal myelolipomaCT coronal reconstruction or MRI can help in determining the kidney as the origin of the lesionInitially described by Edgar von Gierke 6 in 1905 with the term myelolipoma coined by the French pathologist Charles Obenling (1895-1960) in 1929 7,17,18.

Adrenal pseudocysts account for ~40% of adrenal cysts and are more likely than simple adrenal cysts to be symptomatic.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresPseudocysts do not have an epithelial lining and typically arise after an episode of adrenal hemorrhage.
There is an ~7% association with malignancy (e.g. from hemorrhage into a cystic adrenal neoplasm) 6.
Adrenal pseudocysts appear as a simple cyst or may have a complicated appearance (i.e. septations, blood products, or a soft-tissue component).
Calcification may be present 4.
Usually, there is no enhancement post contrast.
Imaging differential considerations include:cystic adrenal neoplasm: often has an enhancing componentadrenal cystsadrenal lesions and anomalies

An adrenal teraoma is a very rare adrenal lesion.
They account for around 0.7% of all primary adrenal tumors.
As with teratomas in general, they are composed of mature tissues arising from more than one germinal layer.
They classically demonstrate a large fatty/lipomatous component as well as calcification/bone with the lesion.
Typically present as large tumors (mean diamter around 9 cm according to one study 4).
Cystic components may also be present.

Tuberculous adrenalitis is the result of adrenal mycobacterium tuberculosis (TB) infection.
Its incidence has decreased in the western world with the declining incidence of tuberculosis.
PathologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAs the tuberculous infection causes destruction of the adrenal cortex, primary adrenal insufficiency develops.
Pathology usually reveals tuberculous granuloma, caseous necrosis, fibrosis, and calcification.
As adrenal involvement progresses, physiological tests for adrenal insufficiency including plasma/urinary cortical measurement and ACTH challenges can raise suspicious for adrenal TB.
Symptoms of adrenal insufficiency may occur, such as fatigue and abdominal pain.
When >90% of the cortex has been destroyed, patients may present with Addisonian crisis, which can be life-threatening.
CT forms the mainstay of evaluation due to its high spatial resolution and availability, but MRI also has a known role in assessing adrenal lesions, particularly in young patients where radiation dose is a concern.
Unenhanced and portal venous phase IV contrast scans are usually performed.
A narrow field of view further helps in optimizing spatial resolution in detecting discrete lesions.gland contour:in the early stage there can be mass-like adrenal enlargementsmooth adrenal contour is preservedlater on adrenal fibrosis and atrophy occurssmall adrenals with irregular marginscalcification:this is a late feature, often occurring post-treatmentit can be punctate, localized, or diffusegland density:central low density can be seen in early diseasedue to caseous necrosiswith anti-TB treatment the adrenals show homogenous densityenhancement:can see areas of relative central hypoenhancementin the early stage there can be mass-like adrenal enlargementsmooth adrenal contour is preservedlater on adrenal fibrosis and atrophy occurssmall adrenals with irregular marginssmooth adrenal contour is preservedsmall adrenals with irregular marginsthis is a late feature, often occurring post-treatmentit can be punctate, localized, or diffusecentral low density can be seen in early diseasedue to caseous necrosiswith anti-TB treatment the adrenals show homogenous densitydue to caseous necrosiscan see areas of relative central hypoenhancementImaging features are analogous to CT except for MR limitations in assessing calcified tissue.

Adrenal vein sampling (AVS) is a procedure where blood is collected from the adrenal veins via catheter to confirm autonomous hormone production, if it is unilateral or bilateral, and to guide further treatment.
Adrenal vein sampling is commonly performed in primary aldosteronism, being indicated to identify aldosterone-secreting adenomas and to differentiate adenomas from bilateral adrenal hyperplasia.
It can be performed also to identify a biochemically proved pheochromocytoma that is not visible at CT or MRI 1.
In rare occasions, adrenal vein sampling could be used for adrenal Cushing disease or for syndromes of androgen excess.
Although technique varies a standard modern approach would consist of 1,3:back pain could be reported by the patient while contrast is injected into adrenal vein, particularly on the rightsome institutions use adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) infusions before and during adrenal sampling.other institutions avoid it due a suspicion of possible misdiagnosed bilateral cases 1.

Adrenal washout can be calculated using the density value of an adrenal mass on non-enhanced, portal venous phase and 15 minutes delayed CT scans (density measured in Hounsfield units (HU)).
It is primarily used to diagnose adrenal adenoma.absolute washout[(HUportal venous phase) - (HUdelayed)] / [(HUportal venous phase) - (HUnon-enhanced)] x 100>60% washout is highly suggestive of adrenal adenomarelative washout[(HUportal venous phase) - (HUdelayed)] / (HUportal venous phase) x 100>40% washout is highly suggestive of adrenal adenoma[(HUportal venous phase) - (HUdelayed)] / [(HUportal venous phase) - (HUnon-enhanced)] x 100>60% washout is highly suggestive of adrenal adenoma[(HUportal venous phase) - (HUdelayed)] / (HUportal venous phase) x 100>40% washout is highly suggestive of adrenal adenomaPheochromocytomas may also wash out, but should have a different clinical presentation.
They also may have a higher absolute attenuation on the contrast phase (arterial or portal venous).
Any adrenal lesion >120 HU with washout should not be diagnosed as an adenoma.
Lesions that are inhomogeneous or with large areas of necrosis or hemorrhage cannot be characterized by their washout pattern 6.https://pcheng.org/calc/adrenal_ct.htmlhttp://www.chestx-ray.com/index.php/calculators/adrenal-characterizationhttps://www.easycalculation.com/medical/adrenal-washout-calculator.phphttps://radiogyan.com/adrenal-washout-calculator/

The venous drainage of the adrenal (suprarenal) glands is typically comprised of a single vein draining each adrenal gland.
Like the gonadal veins each side drains differently:left suprarenal vein drains into the left renal vein 1.right suprarenal vein drains directly into the inferior vena cava 1.Variant anatomy of the suprarenal vasculature is common and has been reported in 13% of patients 2.On the right side, the variants include one central vein with multiple significant accessory veins or a suprarenal vein that drains directly into the hepatic vein 2.
On the left side, variants include two significant adrenal veins or a branch to the left inferior phrenic vein 2.Variation is more common on the right side than on the left (17% vs. 9%) 2.

Adrenocorticotropin independent macronodular adrenocortical hyperplasia (AIMAH) is considered a rare form of macronodular adrenal hyperplasia.
It is an uncommon cause of primary adrenal hypercortisolism.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresPatients with AIMAH tend to present 10 years earlier on average than the time of presentation of classic Cushing disease.
The age of presentation usually ranges around 40-50 years.
Their symptoms also tend to be milder than that of typical Cushing disease.
While the exact pathology is obscure, it is generally thought to result from aberrant hormone receptor signaling.
CT often characteristically shows massively enlarged multinodular adrenal glands.
The nodules tend to vary in size ranging between 1 and 5.5 cm and are generally hypo-attenuating 3.
There is also often distortion of the adrenal contour.
Signal characteristics of the glands as well as the nodules tend to be 2-3T1: generally hypointense compared with the liverT2: hyperintense compared with the liver in-out phase imaging: nodules usually lose signal on out of phase imaging due to chemical shift from high intrinsic lipid contentadrenal hyperplasiabilateral adrenal enlargement

Adrenomyeloneuropathy is a form of X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy characterized by pronounced involvement of the spinal cord with only minor involvement of the cerebral white matter.
Clinical presentation depends on whether or not there is also cerebral involvement.
In the 'pure' form for adrenomyeloneuropathy, which has no direct cerebral involvement, the presentation is dominated by lower limb spastic paraparesis, sphincter dysfunction (mainly bladder) and sensory abnormalities such as sensory ataxia with vibration sense impairment 1,2.
The upper limbs are generally spared 2.
When cerebral involvement is also present, typically occurring a decade or more after spinal involvement, then the presentation is typically with neuropsychiatric symptoms progressing to dementia 1.
The majority (70%) of patients eventually develop adrenocortical and testicular insufficiency 2.
An additional clinical feature is thin sparse head hair and early balding 2.
In the pure form of adrenomyeloneuropathy, imaging is dominated by spinal cord atrophy primarily affecting the thoracic cord 1,2.
Imaging of the brain is either normal or demonstrates minor abnormalities in the pyramidal tracts traversing the brainstem and internal capsules 2.
Cerebral involvement, if also present, appears similar to cerebral adrenoleukodystrophy and is discussed separately.

Adult acquired flatfoot disease is a common condition that results in foot pain and disability.
Most commonly affects middle-aged and elderly females 1.Adult acquired flatfoot disease is a combination of:flattened medial arch (pes planus)peritalar subluxationexternally rotated foot (hindfoot and/or midfoot valgus)Adult acquired flatfoot disease is often multifactorial with disease or dysfunction of the supporting structures 1:tibialis posterior dysfunction (most common)accessory naviculartype II (more commonly) and III variants can result in planovalgus footearlier presentation than tibialis posterior dysfunctionspring ligament injury/degenerationmost commonly secondary to tibialis posterior dysfunction, seen in ~85% (range 74-92%)sinus tarsi syndromedeltoid ligament injury/degenerationsuperficial ligaments, in particular, the tibionavicular and tibiospring ligaments are typically involvedtype II (more commonly) and III variants can result in planovalgus footearlier presentation than tibialis posterior dysfunctionmost commonly secondary to tibialis posterior dysfunction, seen in ~85% (range 74-92%)superficial ligaments, in particular, the tibionavicular and tibiospring ligaments are typically involved

Adult chest radiograph common exam pathology is essential to consider in the build up to radiology exams.
The list of potential diagnoses is apparently endless, but there are some favorites that seem to appear with more frequency.
When dealing with the adult chest radiograph in the exam setting, it is key to determine where the pathology is and separate your lists out from there.
If the pathology is parenchymal, consider which pattern it fits into.
An old favorite and often used as a starting film to get you settled.
Don't muck it up!
And don't try and make it more difficult than it is.
While there are five classic lobar collapses to choose from, it would appear that three are commonly used:right upper lobe collapsevolume loss with raised horizontal fissure, rib-space narrowing and a raised hiluma Golden S sign indicates the central mass causing obstruction and distal collapsesee right upper lobe collapse in the examleft upper lobe collapseas the lobe collapses, it appears as a veil-like shadow over the left hemithoraxthere may be associated hyper-expansion of the superior segment of the left lower lobesee left upper lobe collapse in the examleft lower lobe collapselook for retrocardiac density and loss of the medial hemidiaphragmthere may be a classic sail sign, but don't count on itsee left lower lobe collapse in the examvolume loss with raised horizontal fissure, rib-space narrowing and a raised hiluma Golden S sign indicates the central mass causing obstruction and distal collapsesee right upper lobe collapse in the examas the lobe collapses, it appears as a veil-like shadow over the left hemithoraxthere may be associated hyper-expansion of the superior segment of the left lower lobesee left upper lobe collapse in the examlook for retrocardiac density and loss of the medial hemidiaphragmthere may be a classic sail sign, but don't count on itsee left lower lobe collapse in the examMake sure that you use correct chest radiograph terminology when describing pathology and remember that there is more than one differential for air-space opacification - in real life, it will almost always be pneumonia, but in the exam... think again.
Remember also that air-space opacification starts as ground-glass change, progresses to airspace nodules that tend to confluence and finally result in confluent consolidation.
It is very unlikely that you will be given a simple lobar pneumonia so look more closely - is there associated pleural fluid, cavitation or associated pathology, e.g. rib destruction.
Remember that consolidation is just air-space filled with solid material.pus, e.g. pulmonary infectionstrange to get a simple lobar pneumonia, so look for accompanying signsPneumocystis pneumonia: peri-hilar patchy opacificationtuberculosis: can have any appearanceKlebsiella pneumoniae pneumonia: confluent consolidation with bulging fissuresStaphylococcus aureus pneumonia: cavitationaspiration pneumonia: alcohol misuse, debilitating neurological disorder, recent fall or immobilityfluid, e.g. pulmonary edemalook for associated features including pulmonary plethora,  Kerley lines, effusions and cardiomegalyblood, e.g. pulmonary hemorrhageGoodpasture's syndrome: history of renal diseasegranulomatosis with polyangiitis: history of nasal symptoms/sinus diseaseother connective tissues diseases, infarction, AVM or underlying coagulopathycells, e.g. bronchoalveolar carcinomaan exam favorite that can have any appearancemay be patchy or confluence, unilateral or bilateralotherprotein in alveolar proteinosispulmonary sarcoidosiseosinophilic pneumoniastrange to get a simple lobar pneumonia, so look for accompanying signsPneumocystis pneumonia: peri-hilar patchy opacificationtuberculosis: can have any appearanceKlebsiella pneumoniae pneumonia: confluent consolidation with bulging fissuresStaphylococcus aureus pneumonia: cavitationaspiration pneumonia: alcohol misuse, debilitating neurological disorder, recent fall or immobilitylook for associated features including pulmonary plethora,  Kerley lines, effusions and cardiomegalyGoodpasture's syndrome: history of renal diseasegranulomatosis with polyangiitis: history of nasal symptoms/sinus diseaseother connective tissues diseases, infarction, AVM or underlying coagulopathyan exam favorite that can have any appearancemay be patchy or confluence, unilateral or bilateralprotein in alveolar proteinosispulmonary sarcoidosiseosinophilic pneumoniaAlso remember the classic features of lobar consolidation and the silhouette sign to localize the pathology:right upper lobe consolidationright middle lobe consolidationright lower lobe consolidationleft upper lobe consolidationleft lower lobe consolidationThe cavitating lung lesion is a common film to be shown in the exam, and you need to get your eye in to spot it.
Cavitation can often be subtle, so double check any area of airspace opacification closely - it will change your differential completely.infective cavitationmost commonly Staphylococcus aureus infectionneoplastic cavitationthink primary squamous cell bronchial carcinoma or squamous, colonic or sarcoma metastasesgranulomatous diseaseGranulomatosis with polyangiitis: history of nasal/sinus pathologyrheumatoid arthritis: look for the distal clavicular erosionpulmonary sarcoidosis: associated nodule disease and hilar lymphadenopathyprogressive massive fibrosis: occupational history and background pulmonary nodulesothersinfarctiontraumatic aortic injurymost commonly Staphylococcus aureus infectionthink primary squamous cell bronchial carcinoma or squamous, colonic or sarcoma metastasesGranulomatosis with polyangiitis: history of nasal/sinus pathologyrheumatoid arthritis: look for the distal clavicular erosionpulmonary sarcoidosis: associated nodule disease and hilar lymphadenopathyprogressive massive fibrosis: occupational history and background pulmonary nodulesinfarctiontraumatic aortic injuryThis is a bit of a mammoth project, which will be completed soon:septal lineslung cystsfibrosis (with and without lobar predilection)bronchiectasisdifferential transradienceradiology examsviva techniqueviva preparationviva techniqueviva preparation

A chest radiograph in the exam setting may contain a vast variety of pathology.
However, consider the history and correlate the likely diagnoses that may be demonstrated on film.
Furthermore, check your review areas to ensure that the abnormality isn't at the corner of the film.
When you are presented with an adult chest radiograph in the exam setting and you see an abnormality, you need to work out where it is.
Simple, or, at least, it should be by the time you are preparing for your exams.
So, where is the pathology?pulmonary parenchymamediastinumpleurachest walloutside the chestadult chest radiograph in the exam settingadult chest radiograph set-piecesadult chest radiograph common exam pathologyadult chest radiograph pathology checklistadult chest radiograph set-piecesadult chest radiograph common exam pathologyadult chest radiograph pathology checklist

The adult chest radiograph pathology checklist is just a pathology checklist of things not to miss when reviewing a chest radiograph, especially in the exam setting.standard review areasapicesretrocardiac areahilar regionsbelow the diaphragmright descending pulmonary artery (like a little finger)apicesretrocardiac areahilar regionsbelow the diaphragmright descending pulmonary artery (like a little finger)Run through the areas of the chest radiograph in order and think of pathology that you need to actively check for.
It's not going to just out an hit you in the face.lobar collapse - check hilar positionsilhouette signpneumothorax - especially small apical onesthyroid massparatracheal lymph nodes - especially right paratrachealdensity in the azygos regioncoarctation - check rib notchingright-sided aortic archhilar lymphadenopathypneumomediastinumparaspinal massmediastinal massribsmetastases - sclerotic or lucentdestruction from local processfracturefree intraperitoneal gasmetastases - sclerotic or lucentdestruction from local processfracturehumeral headhumeral head AVN - sickle cell diseasefractureclavicular fracturevertebrapedicle destructionvertebral collapse/fractureparavertebral massH-vertebraspleensplenic calcificationaspleniagas in the splenic flexure immediately below the diaphragmsickle-cell diseasehumeral head AVN - sickle cell diseasefracturepedicle destructionvertebral collapse/fractureparavertebral massH-vertebrasplenic calcificationaspleniagas in the splenic flexure immediately below the diaphragmsickle-cell diseasegas in the splenic flexure immediately below the diaphragmsickle-cell disease

Cervical lymphadenopathy in an adult can result from a vast number of conditions.
They include:malignancymetastases from head and neck tumorslymphomaother neoplastic lesionsCastleman diseaseKaposi sarcomainfectionbacterial infectionviral infectionEpstein-Barr virusherpes simplex viruscytomegalovirusmycobacterialtuberculous cervical lymphadenitis non-tuberculous mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitisothersKimura diseaseKikuchi-Fujimoto disease (KFD) 1AIDS-related lymphadenopathysinus histiocytosis (Rosai-Dorfman disease): young adults 2metastases from head and neck tumorslymphomafrom head and neck tumorsCastleman diseaseKaposi sarcomabacterial infectionviral infectionEpstein-Barr virusherpes simplex viruscytomegalovirusmycobacterialtuberculous cervical lymphadenitis non-tuberculous mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitisEpstein-Barr virusherpes simplex viruscytomegalovirustuberculous cervical lymphadenitis non-tuberculous mycobacterial cervical lymphadenitisKimura diseaseKikuchi-Fujimoto disease (KFD) 1AIDS-related lymphadenopathysinus histiocytosis (Rosai-Dorfman disease): young adults 2lymph node enlargement

Adult cystic renal disease comprises multiple distinct hereditary and non-hereditary disease processes.
adult polycystic kidney disease (APCKD), a.k.a.
autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPCKD)medullary cystic kidney diseasevon Hippel-Lindau diseasetuberous sclerosisacquired renal cysts​simple: extremely common, 50% of which occur in those over the age of 50, many causes including lithium nephropathyacquired cystic kidney disease: seen in ESRFmedullary sponge kidneymulticystic dysplastic kidneyglomerulocystic diseaselocalized renal cystic diseaserenal cell carcinoma: not a renal cystic disease but essential to remember as 10% of cases of renal cell carcinoma are primarily cystic​simple: extremely common, 50% of which occur in those over the age of 50, many causes including lithium nephropathyacquired cystic kidney disease: seen in ESRF

There are a number of adult chest radiograph set-pieces.
These are based on common patterns of disease that are seen on chest radiographs.
Make sure that you have relevant differentials for these appearances and a quick oral set-piece for them when they come up.lobar collapseleft upper lobe collapse in the examleft lower lobe collapse in the examright upper lobe collapse in the examright middle lobe collapse in the examright lower lobe collapse in the examKerley lines in the examcavitating lesions in the examsmall nodules in the examsolitary nodules in the examlung cysts in the exambasal fibrosis in the examleft upper lobe collapse in the examleft lower lobe collapse in the examright upper lobe collapse in the examright middle lobe collapse in the examright lower lobe collapse in the examanterior mediastinal mass in the exammiddle mediastinal mass in the examposterior mediastinal mass in the exammediastinal adenopathy in the exambilateral hilar lymphadenopathy in the examtraumatic aortic injury in the exampneumothorax in the exampleural effusion in the exampleural mass in the examrib destruction in the examlucent rib lesion in the exampectus excavatum mimicking middle lobe consolidation in the exammastectomy in the exambreast mass in the examadult chest radiograph in the exam settingadult chest radiograph set-piecesadult chest radiograph common exam pathologyadult chest radiograph pathology checklistradiology examsviva techniqueviva preparationexam set-piecessystematic reportingpathology checklistsadult chest radiograph set-piecesadult chest radiograph common exam pathologyadult chest radiograph pathology checklistviva techniqueviva preparationexam set-piecessystematic reportingpathology checklists

Systematic reviewCommon pathologyDon't miss...Related articlesCases and figuresWhenever you look at an adult elbow x-ray, review:alignmentfat padsbone cortexCheck the anterior humeral line:drawn down the anterior surface of the humerusshould intersect the middle 1/3 of the capitellumif it doesn't, think distal humeral fractureCheck the radiocapitellar line:drawn along the radial neckshould always intersect the capitellumif it doesn't, think radial head dislocation or subluxationcheck for an accompanying fracture, e.g. Monteggia fracture-dislocationcheck for an accompanying fracture, e.g. Monteggia fracture-dislocationCheck for raised fat pads:visible posterior fat pad always indicates an elbow effusionvisible anterior fat pad may be seen in normal patients and should only be thought of as an indicator of an elbow effusion when massively raisedif there is an effusion in an adult patient, think acute intra-articular fractureif a fracture cannot be identified but an effusion is present, think undisplaced radial head fractureCheck around every bone on the filmhelps to find subtle injuries, e.g. coronoid process fracture or olecranon fracturecommonest adult elbow fracture; most frequently in womenmechanism: fall on abducted arm; direct blow uncommoncan be subtle and easily missedmore...up to 25% of all adult elbow injuries; most frequently posteriormechanism: fall onto extended armassociated radial head fracture, coronoid process fracture, or both (‘terrible triad’)more...common in elderly osteoporotic patientsmechanism: direct blow or fall on outstretched armtypically intra-articular; unicondylar or bicondylar fracturesmore...common, represent 10% of all adult upper extremity fracturesmechanism: direct blow, fall on an outstretched hand with flexed elbow, avulsion fracture or stress fracturetypically widely displaced due to unopposed pull of tricepsmore...uncommon; often in association with dislocationmechanism: fall onto extended armfragments involving >50% coronoid process are unstablecheck for fractures on post-reduction filmsmore...

Adult granulosa cell tumor of the ovary is a type of ovarian sex cord / stromal tumor.
They are by far the most frequent subtype of granulosa cell tumors of the ovary (95%) and are commoner than the juvenile granulosa tumor of the ovary.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresApproximately two-thirds of this subtype are discovered in postmenopausal women (peak incidence 50-55 years old).The tumors often produce estrogen and may present with abnormal vaginal bleeding.
Macroscopically, typical adult ovarian granulosa cell tumors form large multiseptated cystic masses or solid masses with variable amounts of cystic components.
These cystic components often contain hemorrhage.
Microscopically, the tumor cells have pale nuclei that frequently have regular follicles without mucin.
They also have longitudinal grooves that grow in sheets, trabecular patterns, or strands with gland-like structures filled with an acidophilic material recalling immature follicles (Call-Exner bodies).there can be accompanying endometrial hyperplasia due to estrogen secretionappearance varies widely: from a solid mass to a multiloculated solid-cystic mass, to a purely cystic lesionvarying degrees of hemorrhage and fibrosisless likely to have intracystic papillary projections than epithelial ovarian tumorsovarian tumors

Adult-onset leukodystrophies are uncommon compared to those that present in childhood and in most instances are a delayed and atypical presentation of conditions more common in childhood.
They are important differential considerations when assessing adults with white matter diseases.
It should be noted that the term leukodystrophy and which conditions are considered to be leukodystrophies varies from publication to publication.
This is discussed in greater detail in the general article: leukodystrophy.
The vast majority of adult-onset leukodystrophies are conditions that are also, and most frequently, diagnosed in childhood.
Some rare entities, however, are exclusively seen in adults 1.
Below are the more common conditions seen in each instance 1,2.
Alexander diseasecerebrotendinous xanthomatosisgloboid cell leukodystrophy (Krabbe disease)L-2-hydroxyglutaric acidurialeukoencephalopathy with brainstem and spinal cord involvement and lactate elevationleukoencephalopathy with ataxialeukoencephalopathy with calcifications and cysts (Labrun syndrome)megalencephalic leukoencephalopathy with subcortical cystsmetachromatic leukodystrophySjögren-Larsson syndromevanishing white matter diseasex-linked adrenoleukodystrophyadult cerebral adrenoleukodystrophyadrenomyeloneuropathyadult cerebral adrenoleukodystrophyadrenomyeloneuropathyadult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented gliaautosomal dominant adult-onset demyelinating leukodystrophyadult polyglucosan body disease

Adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP), also known as hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS) and pigmentary orthochromatic leukodystrophy (POLD), refers to a rare inherited autosomal dominant disease characterized by an adult-onset leukodystrophy that usually leads to death in around 5-7 years.
It is considered to belong to the microgliopathies.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesFor many years HDLS and POLD were considered two separate hereditary leukoencephalopathies.
Sometimes HDLS was also called neuroaxonal leukodystrophy.
The striking similarities in clinical presentation and histology suggested a link between the two diseases for a long time and HDLS and POLD are now considered to be part of the same disease spectrum, which researchers have recommended calling adult-onset leukoencephalopathy with axonal spheroids and pigmented glia (ALSP) 1.ALSP is considered a rare disease, typically manifesting between ages 30 and 50.
Its exact prevalence is unknown, as it has been previously mistaken for many other diseases and it might thus continue to be underdiagnosed.
While it is usually an inherited disease, there exist case reports of proven de novo mutations and mutation carriers without clinical symptoms currently up to the age of over 70 years 2.Patients with ALSP can have a wide variety of symptoms that usually exhibit a rapid progression and lead to death within a couple of years due to progressive motor impairment.
Typical symptoms are:depression, which might precede the other symptomsneuropsychiatric symptoms, progressing to dementiamotor impairment, with extrapyramidal and pyramidal symptoms that usually lead to tetraparesisapraxia and rarely ataxiaepilepsyALSP is caused by autosomal dominantly inherited mutations in the colony-stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF1R) gene.
The mutations can be proven by genetic testing of blood samples.
Before the identification of the underlying genetic cause of the disease, a brain biopsy was needed to establish the diagnosis.
Neuropathologic findings usually show gliosis, white matter destruction with pigmented glia and/or axonal spheroids and macrophages.
Small periventricular calcifications, often only seen on thin sagittal reconstructions with a bone kernel are a typical imaging finding.
Affected areas show a low attenuation and no contrast enhancement.
Mutation carriers usually show non-specific T2 hyperintense lesions of the white matter that are pronounced for the age of the patient.
MR spectroscopy in these lesions is usually normal without characteristic findings.
Characterized by bilateral, asymmetric patchy or confluent areas of subcortical and deep white matter signal change, usually most pronounced in the frontal lobe followed by the parietal lobe with a relative sparing of the temporal lobe.
The corticospinal tract is usually affected late in the disease course.
Progression leads to a severe atrophy of the supratentorial white matter.
The cerebellum and brainstem are usually spared 3,4.T1: affected areas are low in signalT1 C+ (Gd): no enhancement is visibleT2/FLAIR: hyperintenseDWI: small spots of diffusion restriction, that can be visible over months have been described as a characteristic finding 3MR spectroscopy: (in symptomatic patients)reduced N-acetylasparatate (NAA)increased cholineincreased myo-inositolincreased lactatereduced N-acetylasparatate (NAA)increased cholineincreased myo-inositolincreased lactateCurrently, there exists no accepted causal therapy and the disease leads to death within a couple of years.
General imaging differential considerations include 2-6:multiple sclerosiscerebral vasculitisCADASILClinical differential considerations include 2-6:Alzheimer diseasefrontotemporal dementiaatypical parkinsonism

Adult-onset Still disease is a rare multisystem inflammatory disorder.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyReferencesStill disease in adults is rare affecting around 1.5 per 100,000 people, it occurs in a bimodal distribution with one peak around the age of 15-25 years old and another around the age of 35-45 years old 1.
It affects females more than males 2.Adult-onset Still disease classically is described as a triad of:high feversarthralgiasalmon-colored rashLess common are:sore throathepatic dysfunctionsplenomegalylymphadenopathyElevated inflammatory markers (e.g. CRP), leukocytosis, thrombocytosis and elevated ferritin are common 3.The cause of adult-onset Still disease is unknown but genetic, environmental and infectious factors may play a role 3,4.
Elevated levels of various cytokines are seen in adult-onset Still disease.
Interleukin-18-induced activation of macrophages and neutrophils appears to be important in Still disease.
Interleukin-1-β also seems to be important in Still disease causing neutrophil production and diapedesis 5.
The Yamaguchi criteria is probably the most commonly used and sensitive scoring system for diagnosing adult-onset Still disease 6.Adult-onset Still disease is a seronegative disease meaning a negative rheumatoid factor and antinuclear antibodies are commonly found.
Pericapitate and trapezoid-metacarpal joint space narrowing without radiocarpal involvement is characteristic 7.
This pattern is rarer in rheumatoid arthritis.
Steroids are commonly used to achieve remission of acute disease.
Disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs may be used to maintain remission 3.Three main patterns of disease have been described:Adult-onset Still disease was described first in 1971, by the renowned British rheumatologist Eric G L Bywaters (1910-2003) 8, who thought the disease resembled systemic juvenile idiopathic arthritis (pediatric Still disease) 1.

Adventitial bursae are those bursae that develop later in life in response to pressures developed as a result of acquired bony prominences or deformities 1.
These bursa can become inflamed resulting in adventitious bursitis.

Adventitious or adventitial bursitis refers to inflammation associated with adventitious bursae.
Adventitious bursae are not permanent native bursae.
They can develop in adulthood at sites where subcutaneous tissue becomes exposed to high pressure and friction.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic features ReferencesWhen present in the foot, patients may present with metatarsalgia 6.These begin when pre-existing small fluid spaces coalesce in loose connective tissue.
The walls then progressively become differentiated from the adjacent connective tissue and a well-defined fluid-filled cavity is formed, which is lined by synovium-like columnar cells.
Unlike permanent bursae, they lack a mesothelial lining.foot and ankle region: typical site and usually adjacent to bony prominencesmedial aspect of the first metatarsal headtowards the plantar aspect of the metatarsal headsoverlying amputation stumps 3medial aspect of the first metatarsal headtowards the plantar aspect of the metatarsal headsA region of superficial swelling with a fluid (anechoic) tract corresponding to friction sites in typical locations can be seen.
May demonstrate an ill-defined lesion located in the subcutaneous fat.
Typical signal characteristics are that of fluid:T1: low signalT2: high signalmay have intralesional string- or band-like low-signal structureshigh signalmay have intralesional string- or band-like low-signal structures

Adynamic ileus is the failure of passage of enteric contents through the small bowel and colon that are not mechanically obstructed.
Essentially it represents the paralysis of intestinal motility.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic features History and etymologyReferencesCases and figuresPatients may be asymptomatic or present with symptoms similar to a mechanical bowel obstruction such as nausea/vomiting, distension, and reduced or absent bowel movements.
Bowel sounds may also be absent.
Adynamic ileus can be caused by a number of conditions:drugs: e.g. opioidsmetabolic: e.g. hyponatremiasepsis: especially gram-negative bacteriaabdominal trauma or surgery (see below)myocardial infarction / congestive heart failurehead injury or neurosurgeryintra-abdominal inflammation and peritonitisretroperitoneal hematomaThe cause of ileus is thought to be complex and multifactorial, involving bowel inflammation 6, inhibitory neural reflexes 7, and neurohormonal peptides 8.Some degree of ileus is a normal and expected finding after abdominal surgery, including C-section 9.
Conventional recovery times have been reported at 4:small intestine: 0-24 hours stomach: 24-48 hourscolon: 48-72 hoursThese intervals, however, may be overestimations 5.Prolonged postoperative ileus (>72 hours) has been termed "paralytic" ileus by some and is concerning for small bowel obstruction, bowel perforation, peritonitis, and intra-abdominal abscess.
Improving postoperative ileus is often determined clinically as much as radiographically, with the resumption of oral intake and flatus.generalized, uniform, gaseous distension of the large and small bowelinvolvement of large bowel and lack of a transition point help distinguish it from small bowel obstructionwhen localized, there may be a sentinel loopinvolvement of large bowel and lack of a transition point help distinguish it from small bowel obstruction"Ileus" ultimately derives from είλειν ("to twist"), which also gave rise to the section of the bowel termed the "ileum".
At one time what we now call ileus had been called the "iliack passion" because it was believed that the intestines were twisted 3.

Pathologic aerophagia is a rare condition caused by excessive and inconvenient air swallowing.
It is a self-limiting condition affecting mainly children exposed to high grades of stress but can be a persistent problem in children with psychiatric or neurological disorders.severe persisting abdominal distention: minimal in the morning, maximal in the eveningabdominal painbelching/burpingreduced appetiteaudible air swallowing: pathognomonic of the diseasefunctional intestinal disorders: mainly constipationrespiratory restriction in cases of extreme abdominal distentionPlain radiograph shows diffuse gastric, small bowel and colon distention without signs of obstruction.volvulusintestinal necrosis or perforationdeath in severe cases

Afferent loop syndrome is an intermittent partial or complete mechanical obstruction of the afferent limb of a gastrojejunostomy.
The syndrome classically refers to obstruction of the upstream limb of a side-to-side gastrojejunostomy but has also been used to refer to the biliopancreatic limb of a Roux-en-Y gastrojejunostomy.
It can be seen after:partial gastrectomy Billroth II gastrojejunostomygastric bypassRoux-en-Y gastric bypasspancreaticoduodenectomyBillroth II gastrojejunostomyRoux-en-Y gastric bypassEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisPractical pointsReferencesCases and figuresAfferent loop syndrome is not an uncommon postoperative complication, and one study has estimated that it occurs in 13% of post-pancreaticoduodenectomy patients 2.
Afferent limb syndromes have decreased in incidence with newer surgical techniques to decrease the size of the limb.
Patients usually present with epigastric pain, abdominal distention, nausea, and potentially bilious vomiting.
It has been classified as acute (<7 days postoperative) or chronic (>7 days postoperative).
Bilious vomiting is presumed to occur from regurgitation of bilious contents in the afferent limb into the stomach after release from intermittent obstruction.
Possible causes of afferent loop syndrome include kinking at the anastomosis, radiation stricture, internal hernia, or recurrent tumor at the anastomosis.dilated bowel in the right upper quadrantno dilated bowel may be present, and a high clinical suspicion should be maintained in the appropriate settingnonopacification of the afferent loop on an upper GI studypossible delayed filling of an enlarged afferent loop"U-shaped" loop of bowel, adjacent to the pancreas, usually containing water attenuation fluidcommon bile duct should enter into the looppossible gallbladder and biliary dilatationBoth transhepatic and transgastric approaches to relieve the obstruction have been used.
An open procedure is also possible but second line.there is some differing use of the term "afferent limb" in the literature and depending on the type of surgeryin some sources, "afferent limb" is used to refer to stump of small bowel upstream from the Roux limb; some sources use it to refer to the biliopancreatic limb; always check the context to understand the function of the "afferent limb"in some sources, "afferent limb" is used to refer to stump of small bowel upstream from the Roux limb; some sources use it to refer to the biliopancreatic limb; always check the context to understand the function of the "afferent limb"

Aflatoxins are naturally-occurring mycotoxins that are produced by Aspergillus species, especially Aspergillus flavus.
They are acutely toxic and carcinogenic.
High-level aflatoxin exposure can result in acute aflatoxicosis with acute hepatic necrosis, leading to cirrhosis, and potentially hepatocellular carcinoma.
Chronic, subclinical exposure does not result in aflatoxicosis.
In children, it may cause developmental delay and growth retardation.
Chronic exposure can also result in increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma.
Aflatoxin metabolites can intercalate into DNA resulting in mutation of p53, one of the tumor suppressor genes.
Some base pair locations are preferentially affected, e.g. the third base of codon 249 1.

Agatston score is a semi-automated tool to calculate a score based on the extent of coronary artery calcification detected by an unenhanced low-dose CT scan, which is routinely performed in patients undergoing cardiac CT.
Due to an extensive body of research, it allows for early risk stratification as patients with a high Agatston score (>160) have an increased risk for a major adverse cardiac event (MACE) 2.
Although it does not allow for the assessment of soft non-calcified plaques, it has shown a good correlation with contrast-enhanced CT coronary angiography 1.
The calculation is based on the weighted density score given to the highest attenuation value (HU) multiplied by the area of the calcification speck.130-199 HU: 1200-299 HU: 2300-399 HU: 3400+ HU: 4For example, if a calcified speck has a maximum attenuation value of 400 HU and occupies 8 sq mm area, then its calcium score will be 32.The score of every calcified speck is summed up to give the total calcium score.
no evidence of CAD: 0 calcium scoreminimal: 1-10mild: 11-100moderate: 101-400severe: >400These guidelines are latest at time of writing (July 2016):intermediate cardiovascular risk and asymptomatic adults (class IIa)low-to-intermediate risk and asymptomatic adults (class IIb)low risk and asymptomatic (class III)asymptomatic adults with diabetes mellitus, 40 years of age and older (class IIa)Many risk calculators are available.
Framingham cardiovascular risk calculator uses age, gender, total cholesterol, HDL cholesterol, smoking history, systolic blood pressure, and antihypertensive medication use 5.In one retrospective study, a semi-automated, modified Agatston score applied to the abdominal aorta in non-contrast CT outperformed the Framingham score 8.

The 1-2-3 rule is a simple aide-mémoire describing the nomenclature of any small simple anechoic structure in the ovary on ultrasound:< 1 cm = follicle1-2 cm = dominant follicle>3 cm = cyst

Comparing 1.5 T vs 3.0 T  (1.5 tesla vs 3.0 tesla) MRI systems identifies a number of differences; a 3 T system hasincreased signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)increased spatial resolutionincreased temporal resolutionincreased specific absorption rate (SAR)increased acoustic noiseTerminologySignal-to-noise ratioSpecific absorption rateAcoustic noiseRelated articlesReferencesIt is important to emphasize that in common with standard scientific unit notation, a space must always be inserted between the quantity and the unit symbol, therefore 1.5 T and 3 T are correct, conversely 1.5T and 3T are incorrect, despite the latter usages often being seen in medical media and some radiology reports.
Theoretically, signal is proportional to the square of the static field strength (B0) whereas noise increases linearly.
This implies that, in a perfect system, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of a 3 T system would be twice as good as at 1.5 T. In reality, due to an increase in susceptibility effects in most tissues, the actual improvement is only in the 30-60% range (instead of 100%).
With this increased SNR, the spatial resolution and/or acquisition time can be improved, depending on which is more important for the particular case.
Specific absorption rate (SAR) is defined as the amount of radiofrequency energy (joules) deposited in tissues (kg).
The limit set by the FDA is an amount which results in an increase of 1-degree centigrade in any tissue 2.
SAR is proportional to the static field (B0) squared, meaning that a 3 T system deposits 4 times as much energy within tissue as a 1.5 T system.
Additionally, SAR is proportional topulse duration and lengthpulse numberslice numberflip angle The dependence of SAR on flip angle results in a relatively large amount of energy deposition for standard spin echo sequences since they use 90-degree flip angles.
As a result, there is increased use of gradient echo sequences, which use smaller flip angles.
Unfortunately, these latter sequences image T2* and not T2, and are therefore more susceptible to local field artefacts.
These problems have largely been overcome with modern units.
Rapid gradient switching leads to an increase in the intensity of the acoustic noise, which requires better insulation of both the unit itself and the containing room.

11-13 week antenatal (nuchal translucency) scan is considered a routine investigation advised for the fetal well being as well as for early screening in pregnancy (see antenatal screening).It includes multiple components and is highly dependent on the operator.
Traditionally three factors are used to calculate the risk of trisomies:crown rump length (must be 45 to 84 mm, gestation age 11 weeks 3 days to 13 weeks 6 days)nuchal translucencyfetal heart rateAdditional markers increase the detection rate and reduce the false positive rates:nasal boneductus venosus flowtricuspid flowCombining these factors with blood tests (i.e. dual marker) has been reported to achieve nearly 95% detection rate for trisomies.
Apart from the screening protocol, early detection of major anomalies may be possible and the checklist must include the following conditions:acraniaencephalocelealobar holoprosencephalyiniencephalybody stalk deformitygastroschisisomphalocelelimb reductionmegacystisearly structural scan

14-3-3 proteins are found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), and are currently used to help identify patients with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD).
Seven distinct 14-3-3 proteins have been found in humans.
In diagnosing sCJD, the sensitivity of 14-3-3 protein is 92% and its specificity is 80% 1.
A negative 14-3-3 assay may be helpful in reducing the suspicion of sCJD.Results need to be correlated with the patient's history as CSF 14-3-3 can be false positive in acute stroke, encephalitis, and other dementias 1.The unusual name of the protein family derived from the time of the first protein's discovery when it was found to distribute in the 14th fraction when eluted with DEAE chromatography, and then within fraction 3.3 after additional analysis with gel electrophoresis 4.

18q-deletion syndrome is a rare chromosomal anomaly where there is a deletion of part of the long arm of chromosome 18.
Associated symptoms and findings vary widely, as do their severity.
Characteristic clinical features include short stature, intellectual disability, hypotonia, facial and distal skeletal abnormalities.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe presence of the syndrome is usually evident at or soon after birth.
Although there is significant phenotypic variation, some features are relatively constant and include 1:decreased growthcraniofacial dysmorphismmidface hypoplasiafrontal bossing"carp-like" mouthgenital hypoplasialimb abnormalitiesclubfootsyndactylyshort thumbsneurological abnormalitiesdevelopmental delay and intellectual disabilityocular movement disordersseizuresautismmidface hypoplasiafrontal bossing"carp-like" mouthclubfootsyndactylyshort thumbsdevelopmental delay and intellectual disabilityocular movement disordersseizuresautismChromosome 18q syndrome appears to result from a spontaneous, sporadic chromosomal error during very early embryonic development.
The appearance of the brain on MRI is dominated by hypomyelination and abnormal white matter, particularly posteriorly and in the periventricular region.
It is characterized by bilateral symmetric deep white matter hyperintensity on T2-weighted images, with associated involvement of the subcortical white matter also frequently encountered 1,2.
The brainstem and cerebellum are usually spared.
MRS demonstrates elevated white matter choline and alpha-glutamate concentrations (resonates at 3.75 ppm) 3.

1p19q codeletion stands for the combined loss of the short arm chromosome 1 (i.e. 1p) and the long arm of chromosome 19 (i.e. 19q) and is recognized as a genetic marker predictive of therapeutic response to both chemotherapy and combined chemoradiotherapy and overall longer survival in patients with diffuse gliomas, especially those with oligodendroglial components 1,2,4.
Historically, the 1p19q codeletion was present in up to 70-85% of oligodendrogliomas and 50% of oligoastrocytomas 1,4.
The recent (2016) revision to the WHO classification of CNS tumors has highlighted the importance of 1p19q codeletion by making it essential for the diagnosis of oligodendroglioma (along with the IDH mutation).
In other words: IDH positive + 1p19q codeletion = oligodendroglioma = better prognosisIDH positive + no 1p19q codeletion = diffuse astrocytomaWhen the IDH is negative, it corresponds to a ‘wild-type’ and the tumor behaves far more aggressively, with a poor prognosis, similar to that of primary glioblastoma multiforme 3.
This is discussed further in the article on IDH.

2-hydroxyglutarate is a metabolite that accumulates in the brains of patients with IDH-1 mutated (IDH-1 positive) brain tumors, particularly diffuse low-grade gliomas.
Although not in widespread clinical use, it is likely that 2-hydroxyglutarate, which resonates at 2.25 ppm, will be able to be detected in vivo using MR spectroscopy (MRS), and thus IDH-1 status could be detected preoperatively 1.
This is important, as it is increasingly recognized that IDH-1 status has a significant impact on prognosis.
Unfortunately, as it is a small peak, nestled among the GABA and glutamate/glutamine peaks (which overlap as it is), it requires more advanced MRS and post-processing techniques than those that are currently routinely available.

1p36 deletion syndrome, or monosomy 1p36, is a chromosomal abnormality characterized most commonly by a deletion in the distal segment of the short arm of chromosome one 1.EpidemiologyClinical featuresRadiographic featuresReferencesThe 1p36 deletion syndrome is present in approximately 1 in 5000 live births.
It is the most common terminal deletion syndrome 2.
There is a large spectrum of variability in the clinical presentation of monosomy 1p36.
Some of the neurodevelopmental and physical abnormalities that may be present in 1p36 deletion syndrome are featured below 1,3:growth retardation (ante- and postnatal), however obesity can also be present in subtypes that feature hyperphagia (similar to Prader-Willi syndrome)dysmorphic featureslarge (and late closure) anterior fontanellebrachycephaly and microcephalystraight eyebrowsflat nasal bridgemidface hypoplasiadeep set eyesprominent forehead and chinepicanthic foldslow set earsneurological abnormalitiesdevelopmental delay and intellectual disability seizureshypotoniapoor suck/swallow in infancystructural brain abnormalitiesenlarged ventriclescortical atrophyenlarged subarachnoid spacecardiac malformations and disordersatrial and ventricular septal defectspatent ductus arteriosusvalvular disorderstetralogy of Fallotcoarctation of the aortadilated cardiomyopathylarge (and late closure) anterior fontanellebrachycephaly and microcephalystraight eyebrowsflat nasal bridgemidface hypoplasiadeep set eyesprominent forehead and chinepicanthic foldslow set earsdevelopmental delay and intellectual disability seizureshypotoniapoor suck/swallow in infancystructural brain abnormalitiesenlarged ventriclescortical atrophyenlarged subarachnoid spaceenlarged ventriclescortical atrophyenlarged subarachnoid spaceatrial and ventricular septal defectspatent ductus arteriosusvalvular disorderstetralogy of Fallotcoarctation of the aortadilated cardiomyopathyFindings on antenatal ultrasound such as ventriculomegaly, cardiac malformations and midface hypoplasia, sometimes associated with intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR), as well as various other anomalies, should prompt suspicion for 1p36 deletion syndrome 5.

The 2001 World Health Organization (WHO) classification of hepatic hydatid cysts is used to assess the stage of hepatic hydatid cyst on ultrasound and is useful in deciding the appropriate management for it depending on the stage of the cyst.
This classification was proposed by the WHO in 2001 and at the time of writing (July 2016) remains the most widely used classification for hepatic hydatid cysts.
CLunilocular anechoic cystic lesionno any internal echoes or septationsCE 1 (active stage)uniformly anechoic cyst with fine internal echoes, may only be visible after patient repositioning 2internal echoes represent "hydatid sand" (fluid and protoscolices originating from a ruptured vesicle)2CE 2 (active stage)cyst with internal septationsepta represent walls of daughter cyst(s) 2described as multivesicular, rosette, or honeycomb appearanceCE 3 (transitional stage)evolving appearance of daughter cyst(s) within the encompassing parent cyst3A - daughter cysts have detached laminated membranes (water lily sign)3B - daughter cysts within a solid matrixCE 4 (inactive/degenerative)absence of daughter cystsmixed hypoechoic and hyperechoic matrix, resembling a ball of wool (ball of wool sign)CE 5 (inactive/degenerative)arch-like, thick partially or completely calcified wallunilocular anechoic cystic lesionno any internal echoes or septationsuniformly anechoic cyst with fine internal echoes, may only be visible after patient repositioning 2internal echoes represent "hydatid sand" (fluid and protoscolices originating from a ruptured vesicle)2cyst with internal septationsepta represent walls of daughter cyst(s) 2described as multivesicular, rosette, or honeycomb appearancesepta represent walls of daughter cyst(s) 2described as multivesicular, rosette, or honeycomb appearanceevolving appearance of daughter cyst(s) within the encompassing parent cyst3A - daughter cysts have detached laminated membranes (water lily sign)3B - daughter cysts within a solid matrixabsence of daughter cystsmixed hypoechoic and hyperechoic matrix, resembling a ball of wool (ball of wool sign)arch-like, thick partially or completely calcified wallCL: cystic lesionCE: cystic echinococcosis

The 2005 WHO histological classification of odontogenic tumors lays out a classification system for neoplasms and other tumors related to the odontogenic apparatus.
At the time of writing (2016), it is still the most widely used classification system although a new revision is due to come up in 2017.
odontogenic carcinomasmalignant ameloblastomaameloblastic carcinoma: primary typeameloblastic carcinoma: secondary type (dedifferentiated), intraosseousameloblastic carcinoma: secondary type (dedifferentiated), peripheralprimary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma: solid typeprimary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma derived from keratocystic odontogenic tumorprimary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma derived from an odontogenic cyst clear cell odontogenic carcinomaghost cell odontogenic carcinomaodontogenic sarcomasameloblastic fibrosarcoma (ameloblastic sarcoma)ameloblastic fibrodentinosarcoma and fibro-odontosarcomamalignant ameloblastomaameloblastic carcinoma: primary typeameloblastic carcinoma: secondary type (dedifferentiated), intraosseousameloblastic carcinoma: secondary type (dedifferentiated), peripheralprimary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma: solid typeprimary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma derived from keratocystic odontogenic tumorprimary intraosseous squamous cell carcinoma derived from an odontogenic cyst clear cell odontogenic carcinomaghost cell odontogenic carcinomaameloblastic fibrosarcoma (ameloblastic sarcoma)ameloblastic fibrodentinosarcoma and fibro-odontosarcomaodontogenic epithelium mature, fibrous stroma without odontogenic ectomesenchymeameloblastoma: solid/multicystic typeameloblastoma: extraosseous/peripheral typeameloblastoma: desmoplastic typeameloblastoma: unicystic typesquamous odontogenic tumor calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (Pindborg tumor)adenomatoid odontogenic tumorkeratocystic odontogenic tumorodontogenic epithelium with odontogenic ectomesenchyme, with or without hard tissue formationameloblastic fibroma ameloblastic fibrodentinoma (dentinoma)ameloblastic fibro-odontomaodontomaodontoma: complex typeodontoma: compound typeodontoameloblastomacalcifying cystic odontogenic cystdentinogenic ghost cell tumormesenchyme and/or odontogenic ectomesenchyme with or without odontogenic epitheliumodontogenic fibromaodontogenic myxoma / myxofibromacementoblastomaameloblastoma: solid/multicystic typeameloblastoma: extraosseous/peripheral typeameloblastoma: desmoplastic typeameloblastoma: unicystic typesquamous odontogenic tumor calcifying epithelial odontogenic tumor (Pindborg tumor)adenomatoid odontogenic tumorkeratocystic odontogenic tumorameloblastic fibroma ameloblastic fibrodentinoma (dentinoma)ameloblastic fibro-odontomaodontomaodontoma: complex typeodontoma: compound typeodontoameloblastomacalcifying cystic odontogenic cystdentinogenic ghost cell tumorodontoma: complex typeodontoma: compound typeodontogenic fibromaodontogenic myxoma / myxofibromacementoblastomaossifying fibromas (cemento-ossifying fibroma)fibrous dysplasiaosseous dysplasiascemento-osseous dysplasiaperiapical cemental dysplasiafocal cemento-osseous dysplasiaflorid cemento-osseous dysplasiacentral giant cell lesion (granuloma)cherubismaneurysmal bone cystsimple bone cystcemento-osseous dysplasiaperiapical cemental dysplasiafocal cemento-osseous dysplasiaflorid cemento-osseous dysplasiaperiapical cemental dysplasiafocal cemento-osseous dysplasiaflorid cemento-osseous dysplasiamelanotic neuroectodermal tumor of infancy

20° oblique projection is a troubleshooting projection used in mammography, especially in young women and in follow-up patients.
The C-arm is turned approximately 20° for a superomedial-inferolateral oblique.
With the patient's feet pointing towards the unit and her torso turned slightly outward with the lateral portion of the ipsilateral breast closer to the unit, the breast is placed on the image receptor.
The contralateral arm should remain at her side and the ipsilateral hand may grip the lower aspect of the image receptor.
Raise the C-arm so that posterolateral tissue comes to rest on the image receptor.
Relax the shoulders to better image the upper outer quadrant.
To successfully open the glandular structures, try to flatten the breast.
Gently pull the breast outward and forward and apply compression.demonstrates the entire glandular island with less superimposition than the two projection mammogramsuseful for visualizing the upper outer quadrant of the breastpreferred position in a follow-up patient of young ageuseful as a third projection when seeking further evidence about a possible abnormality imaged on the MLO projectionuseful as a third view for both the unaffected and the affected breasts in patients who have had breast cancer, as these patients have an increased risk of either developing another carcinoma in the unaffected breast or of recurrence in the affected breast

Endometrial stromal tumors (EST) constitute <2% of all uterine tumors and <10% of uterine mesenchymal neoplasms 1.
Over the past four decades, EST classification has gone through various modifications, starting from the earliest study by Norris and Taylor 2.
This was primarily due to the rarity of the tumors.
With better understanding, and at the time of writing (mid 2016), the 2014 WHO classification has replaced the broad categories of the 2003 WHO classification following incorporation of molecular findings.
Endometrial stromal nodule (ESN)Low-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (LGESS)High-grade endometrial stromal sarcoma (HGESS)Undifferentiated uterine sarcoma (UUS)malignant uterine neoplasms

22q11.2 deletion syndrome, also known as the DiGeorge syndrome or velocardiofacial syndrome, is a syndrome where a small portion of the chromosome 22 is lost and results in a variable but a recognisable pattern of physical and behavioral features.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyHistory and etymologyReferencesThe estimated incidence is at ~ 1 in 4000 live pregnancies 4.CATCH 22 is the mnemonic to remember the chromosome and all the abnormalities.cleft lip +/- palatecongenital heart disease (particularly conotruncal anomalies): often a major part of this syndrometetralogy of Fallotinterrupted aortic archtruncus arteriosuscharacteristic facieselongated facelong philtrumfacial asymmetryprominent nosehypernasal speechlearning disabilitiesdecreased immunitymalformation of 3rd and 4th pharyngeal pouches that result in the defective development of the parathyroid and thymus which can, in turn, lead tohypoparathyroidismhypocalcemiatetralogy of Fallotinterrupted aortic archtruncus arteriosuselongated facelong philtrumfacial asymmetryprominent nosehypoparathyroidismhypocalcemiaThere is a near-universal association with a deletion within chromosome 22q11.2.
The majority of cases have de novo mutations.
22q11 deletions are associated with some types of conotruncal cardiac defects as well as conotruncal anomaly face syndrome 5.Mondini malformationchoanal atresiaFirst described in 1968 by Angelo DiGeorge (1921-2009), an American physician.

The 3-6-9 rule is a simple aide memoire describing the normal bowel caliber:small bowel: <3 cmlarge bowel: <6 cmcecum: <9 cmAbove these dimensions, the bowel is generally considered dilated, and an obstruction or an adynamic ileus should be considered.

3D conformal radiation therapy (3D-CRT) is a radiation therapy technique that involves CT planning where the volume to be treated is defined on a 3D data set.
Therefore, organs at risk can also be delineated with the aim of shielding these and reducing treatment side effects.
Radiotherapy planning software is used to design complicated beam arrangements and to assess dose-volume histograms for the tumor and organs at risk.
In its simplest form, 3D-CRT uses a multi-leaf collimator (MLC) in a step-and-shoot technique.
An MLC typically consists of 40-80 tungsten leaves which can move independently into the beam path and thus create nearly limitless beam shapes.
Several of these 'conformal' beams would then be delivered from different angles to treat the tumor volume.

3D printing, a term often used synonymously with additive manufacturing, is a process of creating objects from three-dimensional digital information.
In most cases, 3D printing is, in fact, additive manufacturing, a process in which objects are built by adding material layer by layer.
This process has several advantages over traditional manufacturing methods such as injection molding or subtractive manufacturing relevant to medicine and surgery including the possibility of making uniquely customized objects for patients, rapidly prototyping objects, and often easier creation of complex and/or hollow objects.3D printing has been used in anatomical models for surgical planning, surgical tools, splints, implantable medical devices, prostheses and even pharmaceutical drugs.
3D printed objects have some distinct features even compared to three-dimensional virtual reconstructions in terms of surgical planning 4, allowing surgeons to not only see, but touch models (created based on the specific patient's imaging studies), of the areas on which they plan to operate.3D printing models of surgical pathology, in particular patients, generally requires making tessellated mesh files, such as an STL file, from a patient's DICOM files of CTs and/or MRIs.
After performing appropriate segmentation in DICOM files, a radiologist will often work with a surgeon to understand how to best print (or simply model in 3D without printing) for a particular pathology.4D printing is an emerging technology that can be conceptualized as 3D printing that produces objects that change over time or under certain conditions.segmentation of organs and/or regions of interest is usually done automatically or semi-automatically via computer algorithmsegmentation can be altered or even done entirely manuallyprints can include water soluble material which can be washed awayprinting difficult geometries is often facilitated by printing some structures to be removed or washed away from the final printknowledge of how materials are effected by sterilization is necessary when printing surgical guides or other materials for actual surgerymoulage models can be made by printing air around structures as the mold

Three-dimensional (3D) ultrasound is a technique that converts standard 2D grayscale ultrasound images into a volumetric dataset.
The 3D image can then be reviewed retrospectively.
The technique was developed for problem-solving (particularly in obstetric/gynecologic exams) and to potentially reduce the operator dependence of ultrasound imaging.3D ultrasound has found a useful application in imaging the coronal plane of the uterus.
This format has been found to be useful for:evaluation of uterine shape abnormalities (e.g. Mullerian duct abnormalities)evaluation of intrauterine contraceptive device (IUCD) locationproblem-solving foruterine fibroids (particularly % submucosal component)endometrial polypsintrauterine adhesionsuterine fibroids (particularly % submucosal component)endometrial polypsintrauterine adhesions3D gynecologic imaging can be performed with either the transabdominal or endovaginal approach, but the endovaginal approach results in better quality images.
The quality of the 3D images depends on the quality of the 2D images.
The "Z-technique" is used in many institutions that practice 3D gynecologic ultrasound.
This technique may be found in detail in reference 2.Uses of 3D imaging for the uterine adnexa is currently being developed and may have a use in delineating tubal abnormalities, such as hydrosalpinx.
Applications for 3D ultrasound obstetric imaging are also being developed, such as determining gestational sac location if there is a question of interstitial ectopic pregnancy.

4D syndrome is a term used to describe a manifestation of syndromic glucagonomas, a type of pancreatic endocrine tumor.
D: dermatitis 2necrolytic migratory erythema - a widespread rash, tending to involve perioral and perigenital regionsoral rashes (angular stomatitis, cheilitis)tend to resolve upon removal of the tumorD: mild diabetes mellitusD: deep vein thrombosisD: depression - may be related to severe chronic dermatosis 2necrolytic migratory erythema - a widespread rash, tending to involve perioral and perigenital regionsoral rashes (angular stomatitis, cheilitis)tend to resolve upon removal of the tumor

The 5-tier ACR system was a previously used system for classification of radiologic breast findings, proposed by the American College of Radiology (ACR).
It is no longer in widespread use, having been gradually superseded by the 6-tier BI-RADS classification system first published in 1992.
Interestingly, despite its name, it was actually a 6-tier system!5: malignant4: probably malignant: biopsy should be considered3: probably benign: initial short term follow-up recommended 2: benign1: normal0: need additional viewsNottingham classificationBI-RADS

The 5-F rule refers to risk factors for the development of cholelithiasis in the event of upper abdominal pain:fair: more prevalent in the Caucasian population 1fat: BMI >30femalefertile: one or more childrenforty: age ≥40cholelithiasis can occur in young patients with a positive family history; in such cases, the 'familial' factor can substitute for the 'forty' factor 2cholelithiasis can occur in young patients with a positive family history; in such cases, the 'familial' factor can substitute for the 'forty' factor 2

The 5th metacarpal pit refers to the normal exaggeration of the pit-like depression in the head of fifth metacarpal.
It should not be mistaken for a fracture (old or new) or an erosion.

The 60/60 sign in echocardiography refers to the coexistence of a truncated right ventricular outflow tract acceleration time (AT <60 ms) with a pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (PASP) of less than 60 mmHg (but more than 30 mmHg).
In the presence of right ventricular failure, it is consistent with an acute elevation in afterload, commonly due to an acute pulmonary embolism.
The right ventricle (RV) generates a stroke volume which equals that of the left ventricle; it does so at lower pressures, relatively diminutive chamber dimensions, and far thinner walls (<3 mm) 4.
This compliance also renders the right ventricle exquisitely sensitive to sudden elevations in afterload; facing elevated pressures, the right ventricle will dilate, lacking the capacity to generate an appropriate increase in pressure.
Chronic elevations in right ventricular afterload, however, allow a series of compensatory geometrical changes to occur; chamber dilation and increased wall thickness allow initial preservation of RV stroke volume, albeit at markedly elevated pressures 4.
Right ventricular dilation and contractile dysfunction occur in both acute and chronic cor pulmonale, but only the latter typically demonstrates systolic pressures markedly above normal ranges, commonly in excess of 60 mmHg.
The inability to generate such pressures, therefore, may be thought to be more suggestive of acute cor pulmonale.
The relevant structures of interest are the right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) and tricuspid valve; the apical 4 chamber view or parasternal RV inflow views are preferred for the latter, while the former is best assessed with a basal parasternal short axis view.
the RVOT is best assessed with pulsed wave Doppler (PWD)normal acceleration time (AT) is >90 msan AT <60 ms is markedly abnormal thought to be a reflection of increased mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) 2in the absence of pulmonic stenosis, pulmonary arterial systolic pressure (PASP) is equal to RV systolic pressure (RVSP) which is derived from the following: the pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve (TV)a tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet is first sought using color flow Doppler (CFD) across the TV and right atriumthe maximum TR jet velocity (Vmax) is quantified with continuous wave Doppler (CWD)the simplified Bernoulli equation then allows derivation of the trans-tricuspid pressure gradientright atrial pressure (RAP), which is commonly estimated by observing the diameter and respiratory variation of the inferior vena cava (IVC)if calculated PASP is <60 mmHg and >30 mmHg with an AT <60 ms the 60/60 sign is considered to be present up to 94% specific for acute cor pulmonale due to an acute pulmonary embolismnormal acceleration time (AT) is >90 msan AT <60 ms is markedly abnormal thought to be a reflection of increased mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) 2 thought to be a reflection of increased mean pulmonary arterial pressure (mPAP) 2the pressure gradient across the tricuspid valve (TV)a tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet is first sought using color flow Doppler (CFD) across the TV and right atriumthe maximum TR jet velocity (Vmax) is quantified with continuous wave Doppler (CWD)the simplified Bernoulli equation then allows derivation of the trans-tricuspid pressure gradientright atrial pressure (RAP), which is commonly estimated by observing the diameter and respiratory variation of the inferior vena cava (IVC)a tricuspid regurgitant (TR) jet is first sought using color flow Doppler (CFD) across the TV and right atriumthe maximum TR jet velocity (Vmax) is quantified with continuous wave Doppler (CWD)the simplified Bernoulli equation then allows derivation of the trans-tricuspid pressure gradientthe simplified Bernoulli equation then allows derivation of the trans-tricuspid pressure gradientup to 94% specific for acute cor pulmonale due to an acute pulmonary embolism

Aarskog syndrome or Aarskog–Scott syndrome (also known as the facio-digito-genital syndrome) is a rare anomaly characterized by short stature in association with a variety of structural anomalies involving mainly the face, distal extremities, and external genitalia.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyReferencesPopulation prevalence is estimated to be 1/25,000, with a male predominance.
The major manifestations of this syndrome includeshort staturedecreased bone agecraniofacial anomalieshypertelorismbroad foreheadbroad nasal bridgeshort nose with anteverted nostrilslong philtrumwidow's peak hair anomalyear anomaliesdental anomalies (missing teeth, delayed eruption, enamel hypoplasia)ocular ophthalmic anomalies 2optic nerve hypoplasiaretinal vessel tortuositydeficient ocular elevationhyperopiaanisometropialimb abnormalities short broad handsbrachydactylyinterdigital webbinghypoplasia of the middle phalangesproximal interphalangeal joint laxity with concomitant flexion and restriction of movement of distal interphalangeal jointsflat broad feet with bulbous toesgenital anomalies shawl scrotumcryptorchidisminguinal herniation supernumerary ribshypertelorismbroad foreheadbroad nasal bridgeshort nose with anteverted nostrilslong philtrumwidow's peak hair anomalyear anomaliesdental anomalies (missing teeth, delayed eruption, enamel hypoplasia)optic nerve hypoplasiaretinal vessel tortuositydeficient ocular elevationhyperopiaanisometropiashort broad handsbrachydactylyinterdigital webbinghypoplasia of the middle phalangesproximal interphalangeal joint laxity with concomitant flexion and restriction of movement of distal interphalangeal jointsflat broad feet with bulbous toesshawl scrotumcryptorchidisminguinal herniation It commonly carries an X-linked inheritance.
However, sex-influenced autosomal dominant inheritance is also seen in some families.
The FDG1 gene on the X-chromosome is the only known gene associated with Aarskog syndrome, implicated in 22% of affected males.

Aase-Smith syndrome (or Aase syndrome) is an extremely rare congenital disorder.
Clinical presentationPathologyHistory and etymologyReferencescongenital hypoplastic anemia - fetal anemiatriphalangeal thumbsbroad thumbabnormal claviclescleft lip or cleft palatehypoplastic radiihydrocephalus (due to Dandy-Walker anomaly)joint contracturesnarrow shouldersunderdeveloped lower armsventricular septal defectdelayed closure of fontanelles ear anomaliesIt is believed to be due to an underdeveloped bone marrowThe genetic basis is not yet known however it is believed to be an autosomal recessive disorderJoubert syndromeWalker-Warburg syndromeEllis-van Creveld syndromean overlap with Gordon syndrome is often suggested 8It is named after Jon Morton Aase and David Weyhe Smith, American pediatricians, who characterized it in 1968 5.

The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) injury scoring scales are the most widely accepted and used system of classifying and categorizing traumatic injuries.
Injury grade reflects severity, guides management, and aids in prognosis.
Currently (early 2019), 32 different injury scores are available.
The most commonly used injury scoring grades are for the solid viscera: liverkidneyspleenpancreasInjury is classified according to either imaging, operative, or pathologic criteria - the highest classification is assigned the final AAST grade 2.
Grading of spleen, liver, and kidney injuries has been validated, with increasing grades of injury correlating with increasing mortality, operative rate, and hospitalization cost 3.
Other scales are less commonly used, including:cervical vascular injurychest wallheart lung thoracic vascular injurydiaphragm extrahepatic biliary tree esophagus stomach small bowel colon rectum abdominal vascular injuryureter bladder urethra uteruspregnantnon-pregnant fallopian tube ovary vagina vulva testis scrotum penis peripheral vascular organ injurypregnantnon-pregnant Early efforts to create an organized system for describing and grading traumatic organ injuries included 4:Abbreviated Injury Scale - developed in 1971 in collaboration with the automotive industry to improve vehicle safety, as well as theInjury Severity Score - developed in 1974, first to predict survivalAbdominal Trauma Index - developed in 1981, updated for blunt trauma in 1990, organ-specific injury grading, estimating morbidity/mortalityIn the late 1980s, the AAST formed an Organ Injury Scale (OIS) committee including trauma, orthopedic surgery, urology, and neurosurgery specialists in order to create a more comprehensive classification.
The first AAST OIS guidelines published in 1989 classified injuries of the spleen, liver, and kidney 5.

The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) renal injury scale, most recently updated in 2018, is the most widely used grading system for renal trauma.
The 2018 update incorporates "vascular injury" (i.e. pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula) into the imaging criteria for visceral injury.
ClassificationImaging TechniqueTreatment and prognosisComplicationsSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresSeverity is assessed according to depth of renal parenchymal damage and involvement of the urinary collecting system and renal vessels.grade Isubcapsular hematoma or contusion, without lacerationgrade IIsuperficial laceration ≤1 cm depth not involving the collecting system (no evidence of urine extravasation)perirenal hematoma confined within the perirenal fasciagrade IIIlaceration >1 cm not involving the collecting system (no evidence of urine extravasation)vascular injury or active bleeding confined within the perirenal fasciagrade IVlaceration involving the collecting system with urinary extravasationlaceration of the renal pelvis and/or complete ureteropelvic disruptionvascular injury to segmental renal artery or veinsegmental infarctions without associated active bleeding (i.e. due to vessel thrombosis)active bleeding extending beyond the perirenal fascia (i.e. into the retroperitoneum or peritoneum)grade Vshattered kidneyavulsion of renal hilum or laceration of the main renal artery or vein: devascularisation of a kidney due to hilar injurydevascularised kidney with active bleedingsubcapsular hematoma or contusion, without lacerationsuperficial laceration ≤1 cm depth not involving the collecting system (no evidence of urine extravasation)perirenal hematoma confined within the perirenal fascialaceration >1 cm not involving the collecting system (no evidence of urine extravasation)vascular injury or active bleeding confined within the perirenal fascialaceration involving the collecting system with urinary extravasationlaceration of the renal pelvis and/or complete ureteropelvic disruptionvascular injury to segmental renal artery or veinsegmental infarctions without associated active bleeding (i.e. due to vessel thrombosis)active bleeding extending beyond the perirenal fascia (i.e. into the retroperitoneum or peritoneum)shattered kidneyavulsion of renal hilum or laceration of the main renal artery or vein: devascularisation of a kidney due to hilar injurydevascularised kidney with active bleedingAdditional pointsadvance one grade for multiple injuries up to grade III"vascular injury" (i.e. pseudoaneurysm or AV fistula) - appears as a focal collection of vascular contrast which decreases in attenuation on delayed images"active bleeding" - focal or diffuse collection of vascular contrast which increases in size or attenuation on a delayed phaseThe AAST guidelines recommend dual arterial/portal venous phase imaging for evaluation of vascular injury of liver, spleen, or kidney 8.If there are imaging or clinical findings suggesting collecting system injury (e.g. hematuria or blood at the meatus), additional delayed excretory phase images should be obtained after 5-15 minutes delay to evaluate for urine extravasation 5,8.
Urinary contrast is usually hyperdense and readily distinguished from hemorrhagic vascular contrast.
Note that multiphase scanning should not preempt emergent management in the setting of hemodynamic instability or other life-threatening injuries.grade I - conservative managementgrade II - conservative management under close observationgrade III - conservative management under close observation.
May be managed surgically if undergoing laparotomy for other abdominal injuriesgrade IV - surgical management, especially if undergoing laparotomy for other abdominal injuriesgrade V - surgical managementgrade IV renal injury places patient at risk for developing hypertension due to a decrease in the renal blood flow or secondary to compression of the renal vessels (see Page kidney), leading to an activation of the renin-angiotensin systemAAST injury scoresliver injury gradingsplenic injury gradingpancreatic injury grading

The AAST (American Association for the Surgery of Trauma) liver injury scale, most recently revised in 2018, is the most widely used liver injury grading system 3.The 2018 update incorporates "vascular injury" (i.e. pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula) into the imaging criteria for visceral injury 3.ClassificationImaging TechniqueSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresgrade Ihematoma: subcapsular, <10% surface arealaceration: capsular tear, <1 cm  parenchymal depthgrade IIhematoma: subcapsular, 10-50% surface areahematoma: intraparenchymal <10 cm diameterlaceration: capsular tear 1-3 cm parenchymal depth, <10 cm lengthgrade IIIhematoma: subcapsular, >50% surface area of ruptured subcapsular or parenchymal hematomahematoma: intraparenchymal >10 cmlaceration: capsular tear >3 cm parenchymal depthvascular injury with active bleeding contained within liver parenchymagrade IVlaceration: parenchymal disruption involving 25-75% hepatic lobe or involves 1-3 Couinaud segments vascular injury with active bleeding breaching the liver parenchyma into the peritoneumgrade Vlaceration: parenchymal disruption involving >75% of hepatic lobevascular: juxtahepatic venous injuries (retrohepatic vena cava / central major hepatic veins)hematoma: subcapsular, <10% surface arealaceration: capsular tear, <1 cm  parenchymal depthhematoma: subcapsular, 10-50% surface areahematoma: intraparenchymal <10 cm diameterlaceration: capsular tear 1-3 cm parenchymal depth, <10 cm lengthhematoma: subcapsular, >50% surface area of ruptured subcapsular or parenchymal hematomahematoma: intraparenchymal >10 cmlaceration: capsular tear >3 cm parenchymal depthvascular injury with active bleeding contained within liver parenchymalaceration: parenchymal disruption involving 25-75% hepatic lobe or involves 1-3 Couinaud segments vascular injury with active bleeding breaching the liver parenchyma into the peritoneumlaceration: parenchymal disruption involving >75% of hepatic lobevascular: juxtahepatic venous injuries (retrohepatic vena cava / central major hepatic veins)Additional pointsadvance one grade for multiple injuries up to grade III"vascular injury" (i.e. pseudoaneurysm or AV fistula) - appears as a focal collection of vascular contrast which decreases in attenuation on delayed images"active bleeding" - focal or diffuse collection of vascular contrast which increases in size or attenuation on a delayed phaseThe AAST guidelines recommend dual arterial/portal venous phase imaging for evaluation of vascular injury of liver, spleen, or kidney 3.AAST injury scoresrenal injury gradingsplenic injury gradingpancreatic injury grading

The American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) splenic injury scale, most recently revised in 2018, is currently the most widely used grading system for splenic trauma.
The 2018 update incorporates "vascular injury" (i.e. pseudoaneurysm, arteriovenous fistula) into the imaging criteria for visceral injury 4.ClassificationImaging TechniqueSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresgrade Isubcapsular hematoma <10% of surface areaparenchymal laceration <1 cm depthcapsular teargrade IIsubcapsular hematoma 10-50% of surface areaintraparenchymal hematoma <5 cmparenchymal laceration 1-3 cm in depthgrade IIIsubcapsular hematoma >50% of surface arearuptured subcapsular or intraparenchymal hematoma ≥5 cmparenchymal laceration >3 cm in depthgrade IVany injury in the presence of a splenic vascular injury* or active bleeding confined within splenic capsuleparenchymal laceration involving segmental or hilar vessels producing >25% devascularisationgrade Vshattered spleenany injury in the presence of splenic vascular injury* with active bleeding extending beyond the spleen into the peritoneumsubcapsular hematoma <10% of surface areaparenchymal laceration <1 cm depthcapsular tearsubcapsular hematoma 10-50% of surface areaintraparenchymal hematoma <5 cmparenchymal laceration 1-3 cm in depthsubcapsular hematoma >50% of surface arearuptured subcapsular or intraparenchymal hematoma ≥5 cmparenchymal laceration >3 cm in depthany injury in the presence of a splenic vascular injury* or active bleeding confined within splenic capsuleparenchymal laceration involving segmental or hilar vessels producing >25% devascularisationshattered spleenany injury in the presence of splenic vascular injury* with active bleeding extending beyond the spleen into the peritoneumadvance one grade for multiple injuries up to grade III"vascular injury" (i.e. pseudoaneurysm or AV fistula) - appears as a focal collection of vascular contrast which decreases in attenuation on delayed images"active bleeding" - focal or diffuse collection of vascular contrast which increases in size or attenuation on a delayed phaseThe AAST guidelines recommend dual arterial/portal venous phase imaging for evaluation of vascular injury of liver, spleen, or kidney 4.AAST injury scoresrenal injury gradingliver injury gradingpancreatic injury grading

ABC/2 is a fast and simple method for estimating the volume of intracerebral hemorrhage (or any other ellipsoid lesion for that matter) which does not require volumetric 3D analysis or software.
Intracerebral hemorrhage volume is an important predictor of morbidity and mortality (and thus trial eligibility) which is often under-reported 1.
It has been well-validated and correlates highly with volumes calculated by planimetric techniques 2,3.FormulaInterpretationPractical pointsReferencesFirst described by Kwak et al.
4 and popularized by Kothari et al.
2:A x B x C / 2A = greatest hemorrhage diameter in the axial planeB = hemorrhage diameter at 90º to A in the axial planeC = originally described as the number of CT slices with hemorrhage multiplied by the slice thickness, but can simply be substituted with the craniocaudal diameter of the hemorrhage where there is access to multiplanar reformats 1A = greatest hemorrhage diameter in the axial planeB = hemorrhage diameter at 90º to A in the axial planeC = originally described as the number of CT slices with hemorrhage multiplied by the slice thickness, but can simply be substituted with the craniocaudal diameter of the hemorrhage where there is access to multiplanar reformats 1If the measurements are made in centimeters (cm), then the volume will be in cubic centimeters (cm3).
The above formula is a simplified version of the formula for the volume of an ellipsoid, which is:4/3 π x (A/2) x (B/2) x (C/2)where A, B and C are the three diameters of the ellipsoidwhere A, B and C are the three diameters of the ellipsoidIf π is estimated as 3, then the formula can be simplified to ABC/2.A baseline intracerebral hemorrhage volume of >50-60 mL is a poor prognostic marker 1,5.There are some pitfalls with the ABC/2 method:assumes an ellipsoid lesion (and thus the more the lesion deviates from this morphology the more inaccurate the calculated volume will be)overestimates oral anticoagulant-related intracerebral hemorrhage volumes (because they are often irregular in shape) 3 an ABC/3 formula has been suggested for these lesions 3 although has not yet been validatedan ABC/3 formula has been suggested for these lesions 3 although has not yet been validated

The dorsal decubitus view is a supplementary projection often replacing the lateral decubitus view in the context of an unstable patient who is unable to roll nor stand.
Used to identify free intraperitoneal gas (pneumoperitoneum).
It can be performed when the patient is unable to be transferred to, or other imaging modalities (e.g. CT) are not available.
This projection is not a lateral projection.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresthe patient is supinethe detector is placed landscape of at the patient's left-hand side running parallel to the long axis of the abdomen patient's hands should be raised to avoid superimposing on the region of interest; legs may be flexed for balancepatients should be changed into a hospital gown, with radiopaque items (e.g. belts, zippers) removedx-ray is taken in full inspirationhorizontal beam dorsal decubitus view centering point5 cm above the iliac crests at the midcoronal plane of the patient collimationanteriorly to include soft tissue boundaries posterior to include soft tissue inferior to the level of the pubic rami superior to the diaphragmatic domes orientationlandscapedetector size35 cm x 43 cmexposure70 - 80 kVp30 - 120 mAsSID100 cmgridyes5 cm above the iliac crests at the midcoronal plane of the patient anteriorly to include soft tissue boundaries posterior to include soft tissue inferior to the level of the pubic rami superior to the diaphragmatic domes landscape35 cm x 43 cm70 - 80 kVp30 - 120 mAs100 cmyesit is essential that the anterior abdominal wall and the diagrams are included on the image to detect any free intraperitoneal gas.there should be no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motion.
Due to the high exposure of this examination and the need to demonstrate soft tissue, the use of an aluminum filter over the anterior portion of the patient is advantageous to even out density and filter out higher energy x-rays.

AP supine radiograph can be performed as a standalone projection or as part of an acute abdominal series, depending on the clinical question posed, local protocol and the availability of other imaging modalities.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesCases and figuresthe patient is supine, lying on his or her back, either on the x-ray table (preferred) or a trolleypatients should be changed into a hospital gown, with radiopaque items removed (e.g. belts, zippers)the patient should be free from rotation; both shoulders and hips equidistant from the table/trolleythe x-ray is taken in full inspirationAP projection centering pointthe midsagittal place (equidistant from each ASIS) at the level of the iliac crestcollimationlaterally to the lateral abdominal wallsuperior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiorientationportraitdetector size35 cm x 43 cmexposure70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if availableSID100 cmgridyesthe midsagittal place (equidistant from each ASIS) at the level of the iliac crestlaterally to the lateral abdominal wallsuperior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiportrait35 cm x 43 cm70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if available100 cmyeslateral abdominal wall should be includedinferior pubic rami should be included inferiorlyif possible, the diaphragm should be included superiorlythe abdomen should be free from rotation with symmetry of the:ribs (superior)iliac crests (middle)obturator foramen (inferior)no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motionribs (superior)iliac crests (middle)obturator foramen (inferior)For larger patients, it may be necessary to perform two x-rays using a landscape orientation of the detector to include the entire abdomen.
Exposure will need to be adjusted according to the imaging system (CR or DR) and patient size.
Where possible mAs should be manipulated to ensure adequate image density and appropriate image contrast.

The lateral decubitus abdominal radiograph is used to identify free intraperitoneal gas (pneumoperitoneum).
It can be performed when the patient is unable to be transferred to, or other imaging modalities (e.g. CT) are not available.
The most useful position for detecting free intraperitoneal air is the left lateral decubitus position.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresthe patient is lying on either the left (left lateral decubitus) or right (right lateral decubitus) sidethe left lateral decubitus is preferred as any free intraperitoneal gas will be contrasted by the liverthe detector can be placed anteriorly or posteriorlypatient's hands should be raised to avoid superimposing on the region of interest; legs may be flexed for balancerotation of shoulders or pelvis should be minimized, but not as critical as on other abdominal radiographic viewspatients should be changed into a hospital gown, with radiopaque items (e.g. belts, zippers) removedx-ray is taken in full inspirationthe left lateral decubitus is preferred as any free intraperitoneal gas will be contrasted by the liverlateral decubituscentering pointmidsagittal place (xiphisternum) just superior to the iliac crestcollimationlaterally to the elevated lateral abdominal wall (e.g. right side for a left lateral decubitus x-ray)superior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiorientationportraitdetector size35 cm x 43 cmexposure70 - 80 kVp30 - 120 mAsSID100 cmgridyesmidsagittal place (xiphisternum) just superior to the iliac crestlaterally to the elevated lateral abdominal wall (e.g. right side for a left lateral decubitus x-ray)superior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiportrait35 cm x 43 cm70 - 80 kVp30 - 120 mAs100 cmyesit is essential that the elevated lateral abdominal wall is included on the image to detect any free intraperitoneal gas.there should be no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motion.
These x-rays are often performed as mobile examinations as the patient is too unwell to travel to the radiology department.
The lateral decubitus x-ray may be more useful than the PA erect view for detecting intraperitoneal free gas 1.

PA prone radiograph is rarely performed, often utilized when a patient is unable to lay supine.
The projection is adequate for the examination of the abdominal cavities, however, not as practical for the renal structures due to magnification.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesthe patient is prone, either on the x-ray table (preferred) or on a trolleypatients should be changed into a hospital gown, with radiopaque items (e.g. belts, zippers) removedthe patient should be free from rotation; both shoulders and hips equidistant from the table/trolleythe x-ray is taken in full inspirationPA projection centering pointthe midsagittal place (equidistant from each ASIS) at the level of the iliac crestcollimationlaterally to the lateral abdominal wallsuperior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiorientationportraitdetector size35 cm x 43 cmexposure70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if availableSID100 cmgridyesthe midsagittal place (equidistant from each ASIS) at the level of the iliac crestlaterally to the lateral abdominal wallsuperior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiportrait35 cm x 43 cm70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if available100 cmyeslateral abdominal wall should be includedinferior pubic rami should be included inferiorlyif possible, the diaphragm should be included superiorlythe abdomen should be free from rotation with a symmetry of the:ribs (superior)iliac crests (middle)obturator foramen (inferior)no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motionribs (superior)iliac crests (middle)obturator foramen (inferior)For larger patients, it may be necessary to perform two x-rays using a landscape orientation of the detector to include the entire abdomen.
Exposure will need to be adjusted according to an imaging system (CR or DR) and patient size.
Where possible mAs should be manipulated to ensure adequate image density and appropriate image contrast.
Ensure the patient has adequate head space to breath and hear instructions.

AP oblique supine radiograph is normally performed when localizing foreign bodies or lines within the abdominal cavity.
Additionally, the oblique abdominal series can be utilized in the assessment of the upper intestinal tract during barium studies.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresthe patient is laying 30 degrees either LAO or RAO, often on a 30-degree wedge to ease of positioning patients should be changed into a hospital gown, with radiopaque items (e.g. belts, zippers) removedthe x-ray is taken in full inspirationAP oblique  projection centering pointthe midsagittal place (equidistant from each ASIS) at the level of the iliac crestcollimationlaterally to the lateral abdominal wallsuperior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiorientationportraitdetector size35 cm x 43 cmexposure70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if availableSID100 cmgridyesthe midsagittal place (equidistant from each ASIS) at the level of the iliac crestlaterally to the lateral abdominal wallsuperior to the diaphragminferior to the inferior pubic ramiportrait35 cm x 43 cm70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if available100 cmyeslateral abdominal wall should be includedinferior pubic rami should be included inferiorlyif possible, the diaphragm should be included superiorlyadequate rotation can be confirmed via the presence of the 'Scotty dog' sign of the lumbar spine no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motionFor larger patients, it may be necessary to perform two x-rays using a landscape orientation of the detector to include the entire abdomen.
Exposure will need to be adjusted according to the imaging system (CR or DR) and patient size.
Where possible mAs should be manipulated to ensure adequate image density and appropriate image contrast.

The PA erect abdominal radiograph is often obtained in conjunction with the AP supine abdominal view in the acute abdominal series of radiographs.
When used together it is a valuable projection in assessing air fluid levels, and free air in the abdominal cavity.
The erect abdominal radiograph has virtually disappeared from clinical practice in the United Kingdom, with studies dating back to the 1980s affirming that the erect projection rarely changed management 2.Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical points Related articlesReferencesCases and figuresthe patient is standing, with ventral abdomen toward the image detectorno rotation of shoulders or pelvisshould include the entire transverse width of the patient (if possible; if not, two radiographs may be obtained)hands can be placed around the detector or on top posteroanterior projection suspended inspiration (departmentally dependent)centering point5 cm above the iliac crest at the midsaggital planecollimationsuperiorly to include the diaphragmsto include as much of the abdomen as possible lateral to the skin marginsorientation  portraitdetector size35 cm x 43 cm or 43 cm x 35 cmexposure70-80 kVp30-50 mAsSID100 cmgridyes5 cm above the iliac crest at the midsaggital planesuperiorly to include the diaphragmsto include as much of the abdomen as possible lateral to the skin marginsportrait35 cm x 43 cm or 43 cm x 35 cm70-80 kVp30-50 mAs100 cmyeslateral abdominal wall should be includedinferior pubic rami should be included inferiorlythe diaphragm must be included superiorlythe abdomen should be free from rotation with symmetry of the:ribs (superior)iliac crests (middle)obturator foramen (inferior)no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motionribs (superior)iliac crests (middle)obturator foramen (inferior)Often this view is done in teaching hospitals where a plethora of teams will need to interpret an acute abdominal series.
Patients who truly require an acute abdominal series will be in a lot of pain and quite unwell, a PA erect view may not be possible, these cases consider a lateral decubitus projection (see figure 2).
It is paramount you include the diaphragms in this projection, to aid assessment of free gas in the abdominal cavity.
Often you will cover the lower portion of the abdomen in the supine AP projection.

The abdomen radiograph is a commonly requested examination in the pediatric patient.
Children that present for abdominal x-rays are often very unwell, therefore specialized techniques and appropriate communication are essential for gaining the child's cooperation.
IndicationsProjectionsPatient preparationTips for pediatric abdominal radiographyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresPerforming abdominal radiography on pediatric patients may be requested for the following indications 1,2:swallowed foreign bodybowel perforationbowel obstructionabdominal herniapneumoperitoneumintussusceptionappendicitisinflammatory bowel diseasehematurianecrotizing enterocolitistyphlitisconstipationMRI screeningAP supine viewAP supine (neonate) viewPA erect viewideal for demonstrating gas-fluid levels and free gas under the diaphragm 1ideal for demonstrating gas-fluid levels and free gas under the diaphragm 1lateral decubitus viewideal for demonstrating free abdominal gas 1cross-table lateral view (neonate)ideal for demonstrating free abdominal gas 1Patients should remove any clothing or jewelry overlying the abdominal area; including pants, t-shirts and underwire bras.
In particular, clothing with metal or shiny decorative material must be removed.
Wet diapers are also known to create artifact on the radiograph, therefore should be removed 3.pediatric patients may feel uncomfortable when bony landmarks are felt for, therefore an appropriate explanation to the patient beforehand is ideal for improving patient comfortImmobilization techniques will vary from department to department.
Since blankets or immobilization devices can often obscure the abdominal area, distraction techniques might be the most ideal form of immobilization.
Some distraction techniques that can be used are:using toys, games or conversationusing child-appropriate language (e.g. 'stand still like a soldier' and 'breathe in, you are about to go diving underwater!')for younger babies, asking the parents to sing the child's favorite songOtherwise, a radiographer or parent being in the room with the patient holding them still has been cited as a commonly used technique 4 in the Australian context, however with this method, the parent or staff will receive some scattered radiation dose.

The lateral view abdominal radiograph is a useful problem-solving view that can complement frontal views of the abdomen, often utilized in the context of foreign bodies or to better visualize lines such as a shunt.
It is different from the lateral decubitus view of the abdomen and looks more like a lateral lumbar spine view.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluation Practical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresthe patient may be either erect or recumbent, with her or his side against the detectorlegs may be flexed for balancearms raisedlower bound of the field of view should contain the inferior pubic ramusthe X-ray is taken in full inspirationsupine lateral projection centering pointthe midcoronal plane at the level of the iliac crestcollimationanterior-posterior to the skin margins superior to the diaphragminferior to the level inferior pubic ramiorientationportraitdetector size35 cm x 43 cmexposure70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if availableSID100 cmgridyesthe midcoronal plane at the level of the iliac crestanterior-posterior to the skin margins superior to the diaphragminferior to the level inferior pubic ramiportrait35 cm x 43 cm70-80 kVp30-120 mAs; AEC should be used if available100 cmyesthe projection can be confirmed lateral via the lateral appearance of the vertebral bodiesskin border is not burnt out (a filter may be required to address this) no blurring of the bowel gas due to respiratory motion the lateral abdomen can be useful to visualize rectal gas and differentiate colonic ileus from a distal colonic obstruction however it does not offer much information about bowel gas from the frontal view this projection can be done erect or supine, often used to localize foreign bodies or as part of a shunt series when there is a high degree of winding of the line

Abdominal adhesions are bands of scar tissue (ﬁbrous or ﬁbrofatty), most often occurring as a complication of previous abdominal surgery.
PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresAdhesions often occur withmultiple abdominal operations or previous postoperative intra-abdominal complicationshistory of intra-abdominal inﬂammatory disease not treated with surgeryafter radiation therapy 4Adhesions often form between loops of bowel.
They also frequently attach loops of bowel to the parietal peritoneum, mainly the abdominal wall and the subperitoneal organs.
A non-invasive tool for use in the diagnosis of adhesions is desirable, as laparoscopic exploration may result in the formation of more adhesions.
Adhesions are only rarely visualized, however.
Detection of intra-abdominal adhesions is based on indirect signs or abnormal visceral slide.
Abdominal adhesions are rarely visible on CT, however, CT has proven to be a valuable diagnostic modality in the detection of adhesion-related complications, such as bowel obstruction or bowel ischemia.
In the absence of concomitant diseases, an abrupt transition from dilated to collapsed bowel segments may be the only hint of the presence of adhesions that can be depicted on CT scans.
Small bowel follow through (or enteroclysis) studies may be useful in patients with equivocal clinical symptoms or negative ﬁndings at CT.
Sometimes this procedure can be useful to identify the location and the cause of an obstruction.
Indirect signs of an adhesion include:a bandlike impression on a dilated small bowel loopfailure of separation of adjacent loops with external manual compressionOther signs includehyperperistalsisdistortion of folds with luminal narrowingkinking of an entire loopsmall bowel obstruction

Abdominal and pelvic anatomy encompasses the anatomy of all structures of the abdominal and pelvic cavities.
This anatomy section promotes the use of the Terminologia Anatomica, the international standard of anatomical nomenclature.

The abdominal aorta (plural: aortas or aortae 4) is the main blood vessel in the abdominal cavity that transmits oxygenated blood from the thoracic cavity to the organs within the abdomen and to the lower limbs.
SummaryGross anatomyVariant anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresorigin: continuation of descending thoracic aorta at T12 course: descends anterior and slightly to the left of the lumbar vertebral bodiesbranches (unpaired)celiac artery (T12)superior mesenteric artery (L1)inferior mesenteric artery (L3)median sacral artery branches (paired)middle adrenal arteriesrenal arteries (L1-L2)gonadal arteries (between L2 and L3)inferior phrenic arterieslumbar arteriestermination: bifurcates into right and left common iliac arteries at L4key relationshipsposterior to the median arcuate ligament between two crura of diaphragmanterior and slightly to the left of the lumbar vertebral bodiesIVC is on its rightcrossed anteriorly by the splenic vein and body of pancreas between the celiac and superior mesenteric artery originscrossed anteriorly by the left renal vein, uncinate process of the pancreas and 3rd part of the duodenum between the superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric artery originsceliac artery (T12)superior mesenteric artery (L1)inferior mesenteric artery (L3)median sacral arterymiddle adrenal arteriesrenal arteries (L1-L2)gonadal arteries (between L2 and L3)inferior phrenic arterieslumbar arteriesposterior to the median arcuate ligament between two crura of diaphragmanterior and slightly to the left of the lumbar vertebral bodiesIVC is on its rightcrossed anteriorly by the splenic vein and body of pancreas between the celiac and superior mesenteric artery originscrossed anteriorly by the left renal vein, uncinate process of the pancreas and 3rd part of the duodenum between the superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric artery originsIt is a continuation of descending thoracic aorta at T12 posterior to the median arcuate ligament and diaphragmatic crura.
It descends caudally in the retroperitoneum, anterior and slightly to the left of the lumbar vertebral bodies.
The IVC lies to its right.
Between the celiac and superior mesenteric artery origins, it is crossed anteriorly by the splenic vein and body of the pancreas and between the superior mesenteric and inferior mesenteric artery origins, it is crossed anteriorly by the left renal vein, uncinate process of the pancreas and 3rd part of the duodenum.
It eventually terminates at the L4 level by bifurcating into right and left common iliac arteries.
This is also where the origin of median sacral artery is, which descends along the middle of sacral promontory.
Branches of the abdominal aorta can be thought of as belonging to a number of groups.celiac artery (T12)superior mesenteric artery (L1)inferior mesenteric artery (L3)middle adrenal arteriesrenal arteries (L2)gonadal arteries (between L2 and L3)inferior phrenic arteriesfour paired lumbar arteriesmedian sacral arteryvariable level of bifurcationright-sided aortaceliacomesenteric trunksinuous courseaccessory renal arterydirect branches (e.g. splenic, hepatic, accessory hepatic, accessory SMA, internal iliac)abdominal aortic aneurysmabdominal aortic stenosis/occlusion: atherosclerosis, aortitis, Leriche syndrome

Abdominal aortic injuries are a very rare form of traumatic aortic injury and are much less common than thoracic aortic injury.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAortic injury occurs in <1% of blunt trauma patients, with abdominal aortic injury representing only ~5% of all aortic injuries 1.
Males are more frequently injured, with the median age ~30 years 5.
Abdominal aortic injuries are most commonly from a deceleration in motor vehicle accidents and range from intimal tears/flaps (minimal aortic injury), pseudoaneurysm to aortic transection 3.
Aortic wall rupture can be due to branch avulsion 5.level of the inferior mesenteric artery (~33%)level of renal arteries (~25%)inferior to the inferior mesenteric artery (~20%) 3blunt traumamotor vehicle collisions (~70%) 2,3crush injuries (~20%) 3penetrating traumagunshot injuries more than stabbing 5iatrogenic traumamotor vehicle collisions (~70%) 2,3crush injuries (~20%) 3gunshot injuries more than stabbing 5Associated traumatic injuries in blunt abdominal aortic injury include 2,5:retroperitoneal hematoma (50%)bowel and mesenteric injury, especially small bowel (up to 40%)lumbar spine fracture (~25%)pelvic fracture (~20%)splenic injury (~20%)thoracic aortic injury (<10%)inferior vena caval injury (<10%)renal and iliac artery injuryhepatic, renal and pancreatic injuryThe radiographic features are not dissimilar to thoracic aortic injuries 4.
The seatbelt sign is positive in ~35% of cases 5.Most (~90%) abdominal aortic injuries are managed non-operatively.
Those who require operative management, endovascular repair is more common 2.
Mortality is reported at 30% 2,3.

Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) are focal dilatations of the abdominal aorta that are 50% greater than the proximal normal segment or >3 cm in maximum diameter.
Reference articleSummaryRole of imagingRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; read more in our article on abdominal aortic aneurysm.epidemiologyprevalence of rupture increases with agemales more commonly affected than femalesprevalence is almost 10% in people over 65 years old10th commonest cause of death in Western populationspresentationmay be asymptomatic; aneurysms most commonly discovered incidentally at abdominal imagingpain if there is a rapid change in diameter or impending rupturepain and shock in rupturepathophysiologymany processes may cause aneurysmsatherosclerosis is by far the commonest causeinflammatory, infective and vasculitic conditions may also be causesinvestigationUS for population screening and monitoring small aneurysmsCT is the gold-standard for aneurysm assessmentCT is used in the acute setting of potential aneurysm complicationtreatmentsmall aneurysms without signs of complication are followed upthe larger the aneurysm the more likely it is to ruptureaneurysmal rupture carries a significant risk of deathlarger, complicated aneurysms need treatmentendovascular (EVAR) or open surgery can be performedsymptomatic aortic aneurysms are treated urgently regardless of diameterprevalence of rupture increases with agemales more commonly affected than femalesprevalence is almost 10% in people over 65 years old10th commonest cause of death in Western populationsmay be asymptomatic; aneurysms most commonly discovered incidentally at abdominal imagingpain if there is a rapid change in diameter or impending rupturepain and shock in rupturemany processes may cause aneurysmsatherosclerosis is by far the commonest causeinflammatory, infective and vasculitic conditions may also be causesatherosclerosis is by far the commonest causeinflammatory, infective and vasculitic conditions may also be causesUS for population screening and monitoring small aneurysmsCT is the gold-standard for aneurysm assessmentCT is used in the acute setting of potential aneurysm complicationsmall aneurysms without signs of complication are followed upthe larger the aneurysm the more likely it is to ruptureaneurysmal rupture carries a significant risk of deathlarger, complicated aneurysms need treatmentendovascular (EVAR) or open surgery can be performedsymptomatic aortic aneurysms are treated urgently regardless of diameteraneurysmal rupture carries a significant risk of deathendovascular (EVAR) or open surgery can be performeddetection of abdominal aortic aneurysmmonitoring of the rate of growthpre-operative planningpost-operative follow-upAn aneurysm may be visible as an area of curvilinear calcification in the paravertebral region on either abdominal or lumbar spine radiographs performed for alternative indications.
Ultrasound assessment is simple, safe and inexpensive.
It has a reported sensitivity of 95% and specificity close to 100% 5-8.
It is usually the preferred choice for monitoring small aneurysms.
CT angiography is considered the imaging gold standard but has a high radiation dose.
Excellent for pre-operative planning as it accurately delineates the size and shape of the abdominal aortic aneurysm and its relationship to branch arteries and the aortic bifurcation.
As aneurysms increase in size the risk of complications increase.
CT can be used to make an assessment of rupture, impending rupture or contained leak.
Recommendations may vary, but in general, abdominal aortic aneurysms with the following growth rates and diameters have high risk of rupture and may warrant urgent repair 1-4:growth rate exceeds 1 cm per year or 5 mm in 6 monthsdiameter of at least 5.5 cm in men or 5 cm in women

Abdominal aortic aneurysms (AAA) are focal dilatations of the abdominal aorta measuring 50% greater than the proximal normal segment, or >3 cm in maximum diameter.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRadiology reportTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisrepresent the tenth most common cause of death in the Western worldprevalence increases with age~10% patients older than 65 have an AAAmales are much more commonly affected than females (4:1 male/female ratio)~10% patients older than 65 have an AAASince most AAAs are asymptomatic unless they leak or rupture, they are commonly diagnosed incidentally during imaging for other indications.
Uncommonly, unruptured aneurysms may present with abdominal or back pain.
Large aneurysms may present as a pulsatile abdominal mass.
The most significant complication is abdominal aortic rupture, which presents with severe abdominal or back pain, hypotension, and shock.mortality rate from a ruptured AAA is high59-83% of patients die prior to hospitalization or surgeryfor those who undergo operative repair, mortality rate is ~40%for comparison, mortality from elective surgical repair is 4-6%ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysms are discussed in more detail separately59-83% of patients die prior to hospitalization or surgeryfor those who undergo operative repair, mortality rate is ~40%for comparison, mortality from elective surgical repair is 4-6%Other complications include:pseudoaneurysm from chronic contained leak/ruptureaortic fistulasaortocaval fistulaaortoenteric fistulaaorto-left renal vein fistula (very rare)distal thromboembolismthrombotic occlusion of a branch vesselinfection/mycotic aneurysm (actually a pseudoaneurysm)compression of adjacent structures from large aneurysms (rare)anterior vertebral scallopingaortocaval fistulaaortoenteric fistulaaorto-left renal vein fistula (very rare)atherosclerosis (most common)inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysmchronic aortic dissectionvasculitis, e.g. Takayasu arteritisconnective tissue disordersMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndromemycotic aneurysmtraumatic pseudoaneurysmanastomotic pseudoaneurysmMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndromecommon iliac artery (CIA) aneurysmAAA extends into the common iliac arteries in 25% of cases 14the vast majority of patients with CIA aneurysms have an AAAisolated CIA aneurysms are rare 15popliteal artery aneurysm4% of patients with an AAA have a peripheral femoral or popliteal artery aneurysm 1630-50% of patients with a popliteal artery aneurysm have an AAAintracranial cerebral aneurysm prevalence of ~10%, higher in females 13AAA extends into the common iliac arteries in 25% of cases 14the vast majority of patients with CIA aneurysms have an AAAisolated CIA aneurysms are rare 154% of patients with an AAA have a peripheral femoral or popliteal artery aneurysm 1630-50% of patients with a popliteal artery aneurysm have an AAAprevalence of ~10%, higher in females 13detection of AAAmonitoring of growth ratepreoperative planningpostoperative follow-upAn aneurysm may be visible as an area of curvilinear calcification in the paravertebral region on either abdominal or lumbar spine radiographs.
Although not adequate for AAA detection or follow-up, x-ray may be sufficient for initial detection and diagnosis.
Ultrasound is optimal for general AAA screening and surveillance, because it is fast, spares the use of ionizing radiation and intravenous contrast, and is relatively inexpensive.
The sensitivity and specificity approach 100% 19; however, it should be noted that visualization is poor in 1% to 3% of patients due to patient habitus or overlying bowel gas 19.Although excellent for following lesions, ultrasound does not provide sufficient detail for procedural planning or more complex lesions.
Given a reported range in measurement error of 4 mm 12, ultrasound cannot be reliably used in evaluation for endovascular treatments and assessment of regional branch vessels.
CT angiography (CTA) is considered the gold standard for evaluation, but exposes the patients to high radiation doses.
It is excellent for pre-operative planning as it accurately delineates the size and shape of the AAA and its relationship to branch arteries and the aortic bifurcation.
Oblique reformations enable accurate measurements in non-orthogonal planes.
CTA is superior to ultrasound in detecting and measuring common iliac artery aneurysms.
Signs of frank rupture include:retroperitoneal hematomapara-aortic fat strandingcontrast extravasation from the aorta into the retroperitoneumSigns of impending rupture or contained leakage:draped aorta sign (contained rupture)high-attenuation crescent signthrombus fissurationfocal discontinuity of intimal calcificationtangential calcium signAn increasing diameter of the aneurysmal sac of 5 mm over a 6-month interval or a diameter of 7 cm are also considered to be at high risk for rupture and warrant urgent repair.
Imaging of aortic aneurysms with dual-energy CT can be used to discern the difference between iodinated contrast, calcified atheroma and previous grafts or surgical materials.
Post-processing techniques can create virtual non-calcium or non-enhanced images.
Dual-energy CT has several advantages over single-energy CT including delivering lower radiation doses, lower volumes of contrast, removing calcified plaques from the image to allow assessment of the degree of stenosis and allows better assessment of endoleak 22.
Offers lack of ionizing radiation, but is more costly, less widely available, and the examination is substantially lengthier.
Catheter-based angiography alone is inadequate for pre-procedural evaluation of AAA.
While digital subtraction angiography (DSA) is superb for delineating regional branch vessels, it can be misleading and mask true aneurysm size in the setting of mural thrombus.
Certain features and relevant negatives regarding AAA should be included in the radiology report - especially if this is a new or undocumented finding:morphologymaximum transverse diameter of the aneurysmal sacmust be measured perpendicular to the longitudinal aortic axiskeep in mind that an aneurysm never decreases in size!longitudinal lengthshape (saccular/fusiform/eccentric)any major kinkupper extent, relative to the renal arterieslower extent, including extension into any branchesany side or visceral branches arising from the aneurysmcomplicationssigns of impending rupturebranch-vessel dissectionend vessel infarct (e.g. renal or splenic infarct)relevant anatomydiameters of the common femoral artery (CFA) and external iliac artery (EIA) for the planning of endovascular treatmentpresence of aberrant renal veins (e.g. retroaortic or circumaortic left renal vein)presence of accessory renal arteriesmaximum transverse diameter of the aneurysmal sacmust be measured perpendicular to the longitudinal aortic axiskeep in mind that an aneurysm never decreases in size!longitudinal lengthshape (saccular/fusiform/eccentric)any major kinkupper extent, relative to the renal arterieslower extent, including extension into any branchesany side or visceral branches arising from the aneurysmmust be measured perpendicular to the longitudinal aortic axiskeep in mind that an aneurysm never decreases in size!signs of impending rupturebranch-vessel dissectionend vessel infarct (e.g. renal or splenic infarct)diameters of the common femoral artery (CFA) and external iliac artery (EIA) for the planning of endovascular treatmentpresence of aberrant renal veins (e.g. retroaortic or circumaortic left renal vein)presence of accessory renal arteriesAlso see: reporting tips for aortic aneurysmsThe natural history of abdominal aortic aneurysms is variable; some small aneurysms do not appear to change, while others slowly expand and become at risk for eventual rupture 19,21.
A number of clinical factors (e.g. smoking, gender, blood pressure) are known to contribute.
Ultimately, the primary clinical question is whether and when to intervene in order to avoid aortic rupture.
In terms of imaging, there remains debate about the best criteria for predicting AAA rupture and therefore indications for operative intervention.
Prognostic imaging criteria include:maximum transverse diametermost widely used and validated method 19,202018 Society of Vascular Surgery recommendations generally recommend intervention for AAA ≥5.4 cm, and surveillance for smaller diameter lesions 19young, healthy (especially female) patients may benefit from intervention for lesions between 5.0 - 5.4 cm 19most study data is based on fusiform aneurysms; it is debated whether the more uncommon saccular aneurysm is at higher risk for rupture at smaller transverse diameter 19rate of aneurysm growthenlargement in transverse diameter ≥5 mm in 6 months may be an indication for intervention 17​symptomatic lesions 19most widely used and validated method 19,202018 Society of Vascular Surgery recommendations generally recommend intervention for AAA ≥5.4 cm, and surveillance for smaller diameter lesions 19young, healthy (especially female) patients may benefit from intervention for lesions between 5.0 - 5.4 cm 19most study data is based on fusiform aneurysms; it is debated whether the more uncommon saccular aneurysm is at higher risk for rupture at smaller transverse diameter 19enlargement in transverse diameter ≥5 mm in 6 months may be an indication for intervention 17In patients with a connective tissue disorder (e.g. Marfan syndrome), especially those with a bicuspid aortic valve, surgical treatment may be considered even with a diameter smaller than 5.0 cm.
Follow-up intervals for imaging an enlarged infrarenal abdominal aorta from initial detection 11:<2.5 cm: follow up not needed2.5-2.9 cm: 5 year interval3.0-3.4 cm: 3 year interval3.5-3.9 cm: 2 year interval4.0-4.4 cm: 1-year interval4.5-4.9 cm: 6-month interval5.0-5.5 cm: 3-6 month interval>5.5 cm: treatmentManagement options include:surveillance (see above)endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR)if the anatomy permits, EVAR is preferred vs surgical repairaneurysm-related mortality has been shown to be much lower with EVAR vs surgical repairresection (open surgical repair)if the anatomy permits, EVAR is preferred vs surgical repairaneurysm-related mortality has been shown to be much lower with EVAR vs surgical repairaortic dissection

Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) rupture is a feared complication of abdominal aortic aneurysm and is a surgical emergency.
It is part of the acute aortic syndrome spectrum.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAbdominal aortic aneurysms are common and affect ~7.5% of patients aged over 65 years 6.The classical triad of pain, hypotension and pulsatile abdominal mass due to rupture into the retroperitoneum is only seen in 25-50% of patients.
A chronic rupture may escape detection for about weeks to months and are known as sealed aneurysmal rupture or spontaneously healed aneurysmal rupture or abdominal aortic aneurysmal leak.
Unusual presentations of ruptured abdominal aortic aneurysm aretransient lower limb paralysisright upper quadrant paingroin paintesticular paintesticular ecchymosis (blue scrotum sign of Bryant)iliofemoral venous thrombosisThe aneurysmal rupture is thought to occur when the mechanical stress is in excess of the wall strength.
Thus, the aortic aneurysmal wall tension and the aneurysmal diameter are a significant predictor of impending rupture.
The commonest sites of rupture and their relative incidences areintraperitoneal rupture: 20%retroperitoneal rupture: 80%aortocaval fistula: 3-4%primary aorto-enteric fistula: < 1%aorto-left renal vein fistula: very rare; < 30 cases reportedAbdominal radiographs are not a sensitive mode of detection.
A calcified aortic aneurysm may be seen with a secondary blurring of the psoas outline in case of retroperitoneal hemorrhage.focal dilatation of the aorta (aneurysm)peri-aortic fluidfree intraperitoneal fluidretroperitoneal fluid: representing retroperitoneal hemorrhageRetroperitoneal hemorrhage adjacent the aneurysm is the most common finding.
The peri-aortic blood may be seen to extend into perirenal or pararenal spaces, or the psoas muscles.
Intraperitoneal extension of the hemorrhage may be seen as an immediate or a delayed finding.
An important feature seen in contained rupture of an aortic aneurysm is the draped aorta sign - in which the posterior wall of the aorta is not seen distinctly from adjacent structures, and the contour of the aorta follows that of adjacent vertebrae.
A hyperattenuating crescent sign, which is an area of increased attenuation within the aortic aneurysmal mural thrombus, can be demonstrated on plain CT images.
This is caused by the insinuation of fresh blood into the mural thrombus and aortic wall.
On post-contrast studies or CT angiography, active extravasation of contrast material can be seen.increased aneurysm size on serial imaging (rate of 10 mm or more per year)very large abdominal aortic aneurysm > 7 cmreduced thrombus sizethrombus fissurationdiscontinuity in calcificationhyperattenuating crescent sign well defined peripheral crescent of increased attenuation within the thrombus of a large abdominal aortic aneurysmTreatment of an acute rupture should be prompt and can be with endovascular aneurysm repair (EVAR) or open surgery.
The mortality rate is very high being > 90% 6.

The abdominal cavity is divided into two major compartments, the peritoneum and retroperitoneum, early in fetal development.
The parietal peritoneum is reflected over the peritoneal organs to form a series of supporting peritoneal ligaments, mesenteries and omenta.
The peritoneal reflections carry vessels, nerves and lymphatics from the retroperitoneum to the peritoneal organs.
They may act as a natural connection between the retroperitoneum and peritoneum (the subperitoneal space) which provides a pathway for the extension of intra-abdominal disease.

Abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS) is the life-threatening clinical state of increased intra-abdominal compartment pressure (IAP).
Radiological diagnosis is difficult and usually raised when a collection of imaging findings are present in the appropriate clinical setting or if the signs on sequential imaging studies are seen to progress.
Diagnosis is usually clinically supported by elevated intravesicular pressure which closely parallels IAP.TerminologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresACS is defined as elevated IAP >20 mmHg with dysfunction of at least one thoraco-abdominal organ.
It may be known as intra-abdominal hypertension (IAH), but this specifically refers to IAH >12 mmHg without the clinical manifestations.
Patients present with one or many organs failing due to the elevated pressure in the abdomen having direct or indirect effects on the major body systems.
Most patients will have abdominal distension.
Patients often have multifactorial disease and injuries, and ACS is particularly associated with:sepsisacute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)hypovolemic shocksystemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS)multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS)Typically, the severely ill patient is in the intensive care/therapy unit (ICU/ITU) and clinically presents with massive abdominal distention, anuria or progressive oliguria despite adequate cardiac output and/or increasingly difficult mechanical ventilation.
Increased IAP in abdominal compartment syndrome has numerous causes which can be subdivided accordingly:primary (abdominopelvic disease or injury)traumahigh-grade liver traumapelvic fractureshemoperitoneumpenetrating abdominopelvic traumasurgeryliver transplantationabdominal surgery in obese patientspost-operative hemoperitoneumabdominal packing for bleedingpancreatitisruptured abdominal aortic aneurysmascitespneumoperitoneumsecondary (disease or injury outside the abdomen and pelvis)burnssepsisrapid fluid resuscitationtraumahigh-grade liver traumapelvic fractureshemoperitoneumpenetrating abdominopelvic traumasurgeryliver transplantationabdominal surgery in obese patientspost-operative hemoperitoneumabdominal packing for bleedingpancreatitisruptured abdominal aortic aneurysmascitespneumoperitoneumhigh-grade liver traumapelvic fractureshemoperitoneumpenetrating abdominopelvic traumaliver transplantationabdominal surgery in obese patientspost-operative hemoperitoneumabdominal packing for bleedingburnssepsisrapid fluid resuscitationThere are several overlapping CT and sonographic signs that may support the diagnosis but none are considered specific or sensitive for ACS 2:elevated diaphragmrounded appearance of the abdominal wall (round belly sign 4)hemoperitoneumflattened inferior vena cava and renal veinsdisplacement of solid abdominal visceramosaic liver perfusionincreased bowel and gastric wall thickening and enhancementgastric distentionincrease in ascites over subsequent scansbilateral inguinal herniationpneumoperitoneumpulmonary basal consolidation, collapse and/or pleural effusionreduced diastolic flow in portal, hepatic, and/or renal veinsMortality is high in ACS ranging between 60-70% 2.
Treatment is aimed at reducing the elevated pressure within the abdomen to correct the reduced perfusion of the affected viscera and prevent irreversible organ failure.
This is achieved surgically with decompressive laparotomy but mortality remains high after surgery, reflecting the multifactorial physiological disturbances in these critically ill patients 3.
After laparotomy, the abdomen is often left open in those who are at high risk of developing ACS.Other treatment strategies include drainage of fluid collections with non-operative methods and muscle relaxation.renal failureischemic bowelrespiratory failure causing hypercapnia and respiratory acidosis from reduced diaphragmatic efficiency and resulting compressive atelectasisheart failure from reduced cardiac output and decreased venous return

A mnemonic for causes of abdominal distension (6 Fs) is:F: fatF: fluid F: flatusF: feces F: fetusF: fulminant mass

Abdominal ectopic pregnancies are an extremely rare type of ectopic pregnancy.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic assessmentTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThey are thought to represent ~1% of all ectopic pregnancies 6 with an estimated incidence of 1:1000-10,000 births.
It is often thought that they most frequently result from a tubal rupture with subsequent reimplantation of the conceptus onto bowel, omentum or mesentery (in very rare situations primary abdominal ectopic may also occur).
Uncommon cases when it develops as a result of a scar rupture have also been reported 3.It typically develops around the ligaments of the ovary, on the uterus or in the pouch of Douglas, although it can implant anywhere within the abdominal cavity.
It can then obtain blood supply from the omentum and abdominal organs.
At times these pregnancies migrate out of the pelvis and are seen in the upper abdomen.
The placental attachment can also be at unusual sites including the anterior abdominal wall 7.
previous tubal damagepelvic inflammatory diseaseendometriosisIVF 8presence of an intrauterine device 9Ultrasound is often at the frontline of imaging.
Sonographically the pregnancy is seen separate from the uterus, adnexa, and ovaries.
May have a role in better delineation of anatomy and relationships especially when the pregnancy is advanced.
It is a serious and potentially life-threatening condition.
Maternal mortality associated with intra-abdominal pregnancy is estimated at 7.7 times that of other locations of ectopic pregnancy 6, with a mortality rate of ~5% 8.Treatment is by often by means of placental embolization followed by a laparotomy or laparoscopy.
While an abdominal pregnancy can result in a life-threatening emergency, especially when diagnosed late in gestation, it can also result in a live birth by means of a laparotomy 1.intra-abdominal hemorrhage with massive hemoperitoneum

The role of dual energy CT is becoming increasingly more prevalent abdominal imaging due to the availability of scanners and increasing field of research.
The addition of iodine maps and 40-keV monoenergetic images to standard single energy CT images was found to increase reader confidence and accuracy in diagnosing acute bowel ischemia.
Ischemic segments have been found to have lower densities and iodine concentrations compared to non-ischemic segments 1.

Abdominal hernias (herniae also used) may be congenital or acquired and come with varying eponyms.
They are distinguished primarily based on location and content.
75-80% of all hernias are inguinal.
Content of the hernia is variable, and may include:small bowel loopsmobile colon segments (sigmoid, cecum, appendix)mesenteric fatother visceraComplications predominantly relate to bowel incarceration, strangulation, and intestinal obstruction.
Large diaphragmatic hernias in infancy may be complicated by pulmonary hypoplasia.ventral: anterior and lateral abdominal herniasdorsalgroin: most commonanterior abdominal wall herniationepigastric herniaincisional herniaport site herniainterparietal herniaMaydl herniaparastomal herniaparaumbilical herniaRichter hernia: contains only one wall of a bowel loopSpigelian herniaumbilical herniarectus sheath lumbar herniation: superior and inferiorgroin herniationinguinal herniadirect inguinal herniaindirect inguinal hernia: five times commoner than directAmyand herniapantaloon herniafemoral herniaDe Garengeot herniaobturator herniadiaphragmatic herniationBochdalek herniahiatus herniaMorgagni herniainternal herniation: an uncommon cause of bowel obstructionthe left paraduodenal fossa (fossa of Landzert): most commonthe right paraduodenal fossa (fossa of Waldyer)the foramen of Winslow (lesser sac)a hole in the mesentery (transmesenteric)a hole in the transverse mesocolona defect in the broad ligamentthe superior ileocecal fossathe inferior ileocecal fossathe retrocecal fossaLittre hernia: hernia containing a Meckel diverticulumpelvic herniaperineal herniasciatic herniaepigastric herniaincisional herniaport site herniainterparietal herniaMaydl herniaparastomal herniaparaumbilical herniaRichter hernia: contains only one wall of a bowel loopSpigelian herniaumbilical herniarectus sheath port site herniainguinal herniadirect inguinal herniaindirect inguinal hernia: five times commoner than directAmyand herniapantaloon herniafemoral herniaDe Garengeot herniaobturator herniadirect inguinal herniaindirect inguinal hernia: five times commoner than directAmyand herniaAmyand herniaDe Garengeot herniaBochdalek herniahiatus herniaMorgagni herniathe left paraduodenal fossa (fossa of Landzert): most commonthe right paraduodenal fossa (fossa of Waldyer)the foramen of Winslow (lesser sac)a hole in the mesentery (transmesenteric)a hole in the transverse mesocolona defect in the broad ligamentthe superior ileocecal fossathe inferior ileocecal fossathe retrocecal fossaperineal herniasciatic hernia

Abdominal migraine (AM) is a syndrome which presents as recurrent episodes of severe abdominal pain, coupled with vasomotor symptoms, nausea and emesis.
Historically it has tended to be a pediatric diagnosis, but is now increasingly seen in adults.
It is one of the functional gastrointestinal disorders (FGIDs) 1.
Similar to the other FGIDs its pathogenesis remains unresolved despite extensive ongoing work.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesSeveral research studies have established a range in prevalence from 0.4-4% 1.
Studies suggest that the majority of children affected do not experience the condition into adulthood.
Diagnosis employs both the International Classification of Headache Disorders diagnostic criteria and Rome criteria.
Establishing the diagnosis requires at least two discrete episodes in a one-year period.
These episodes must consist of:anorexianauseavomitingheadachephotophobiapallorNo specific pathological diagnostic markers exist.
By definition (see above) all imaging of the GI system should be unremarkable.
An ideal management framework remains to be established.
Nevertheless the key initial step is to exclude serious underlying organic disease e.g. inflammatory bowel disease and malignancy.
Symptomatic therapy, e.g. analgesics and antiemetics is useful.
The long term prognosis of abdominal migraine remains undetermined, however it is clear that affected children have an increased risk of developing 'classic' migrainous headaches.

An opacity projecting over the abdomen has a broad differential.
Possibilities to consider include:foreign bodiesingested, e.g. coins, batteries, bones, etcartifacts, e.g. object attached to the cloth of the patient like a safety pin or buttoniatrogenic, e.g. hemostatic clips, gastric banding, retained pack or surgical instrumenttraumatic, e.g. bullet or pellet from firearm injuriesretained barium or dense fecal matter which may be retained for months in cases of colonic diverticulosisappendicolithdystrophic calcificationinjection granuloma pancreatic calcification in chronic pancreatitisuterine fibroid calcificationperitoneal calcificationslymph node calcification: generally mesenteric having a lobulated contourcalculiurolithiasisgallstoneswithin the biliary tractgallstone ileusretained gallstonesbladder calculiingested, e.g. coins, batteries, bones, etcartifacts, e.g. object attached to the cloth of the patient like a safety pin or buttoniatrogenic, e.g. hemostatic clips, gastric banding, retained pack or surgical instrumenttraumatic, e.g. bullet or pellet from firearm injuriesinjection granuloma pancreatic calcification in chronic pancreatitisuterine fibroid calcificationperitoneal calcificationslymph node calcification: generally mesenteric having a lobulated contoururolithiasisgallstoneswithin the biliary tractgallstone ileusretained gallstonesbladder calculiwithin the biliary tractgallstone ileusretained gallstones

This mnemonic helps to remember the relative echogenicity of abdominal organs on ultrasound:Darling Parents So Love KidsFrom most to least echogenic:D: diaphragmP: pancreasS: spleenL: liverK: kidneys (cortex)

Abdominal paracentesis, more commonly referred to as an ascitic tap, is a procedure that can be performed to collect peritoneal fluid for analysis or as a therapeutic intervention.
IndicationsContraindicationsProcedureComplicationsReferencesCases and figuresdiagnostic: especially for newly-diagnosed ascitesdetermine etiology of ascitesassess for bacterial peritonitistherapeuticto relieve pressure effects of ascites, including respiratory compromisedetermine etiology of ascitesassess for bacterial peritonitisto relieve pressure effects of ascites, including respiratory compromiseabsolutesurgical abdomenrelative 4coagulopathy (INR >2.0)severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50 x 103/μL)abdominal wall cellulitispregnancyurinary bladder distensionintraabdominal adhesionsmassive ileussurgical abdomencoagulopathy (INR >2.0)severe thrombocytopenia (platelet count <50 x 103/μL)abdominal wall cellulitispregnancyurinary bladder distensionintraabdominal adhesionsmassive ileusPrior to procedure being performed assessment of the amount and nature of the ascites should be made using preferably CT or ultrasound.
The patient's coagulation profile should be considered and informed consent obtained.
The indication for the procedure should be considered to determine the volume of fluid to be removed.
Full aseptic technique, with antiseptic skin preparation and infiltration of local anesthetic should be employed.
Patient can be positioned to allow accumulation of fluid to one side.
Procedure can be performed blind using the landmark technique (15 cm lateral to the umbilicus in the right or left lower quadrant) or after ultrasound marking prior to procedure.
It can also be done image-guided, almost always with ultrasound 1.Ultrasound guidance may be used in either a dynamic or static manner, although both should utilize the same pre-procedural scanning goals; the identification of the largest ascitic collection (3 cm being the minimum safe pocket) and where the abdominal wall is free of vessels or excessive adipose tissue.static technique 5the ideal entry site is marked with two perpendicular lines indicating the location of the targeted fluid pocket, as identified in two orthogonal planesthe catheter-over-needle apparatus is inserted in a perpendicular manner at the junction of the aforementioned markingsdynamic techniqueeither short axis or long axis visualization may be used the latter allows visualization of the needle throughout the procedurethe former relies on intermittent visualization of the needle tipeither approach necessitates a 45 degree angle of entry, either at the mid-point of the probe footprint (short axis) and advancing the needle in an out-of-plane manner, or slightly lateral to the probe footprint (long-axis), advancing in an in-plane manner.the ideal entry site is marked with two perpendicular lines indicating the location of the targeted fluid pocket, as identified in two orthogonal planesthe catheter-over-needle apparatus is inserted in a perpendicular manner at the junction of the aforementioned markingseither short axis or long axis visualization may be used the latter allows visualization of the needle throughout the procedurethe former relies on intermittent visualization of the needle tipeither approach necessitates a 45 degree angle of entry, either at the mid-point of the probe footprint (short axis) and advancing the needle in an out-of-plane manner, or slightly lateral to the probe footprint (long-axis), advancing in an in-plane manner.
the latter allows visualization of the needle throughout the procedurethe former relies on intermittent visualization of the needle tipeither approach necessitates a 45 degree angle of entry, either at the mid-point of the probe footprint (short axis) and advancing the needle in an out-of-plane manner, or slightly lateral to the probe footprint (long-axis), advancing in an in-plane manner.
An 18G needle with a 10 mL syringe is passed using a Z-track technique, to minimize the risk of persistent leak following removal.
Negative pressure is kept on the syringe until ascitic fluid is aspirated, with subsequent catheter advancement, needle removal, and attachment of a three way stopcock.
The Seldinger technique can be used to leave an ~8 Fr catheter in situ for therapeutic procedures.
Alternatively a trocar catheter set can also be used.
Fluid can be sent for the following tests:gram stain, culture and sensitivitycell count (especially neutrophils)cytologyalbumin levels (to assess serum ascites albumin gradient (SA-AG)triglyceride level (high in chylous ascites)glucose levellactate dehydrogenase levelamylase level (suggests pancreatic pathology)pHPostprocedure care should be taken with therapeutic procedures to avoid large fluid shifts.
Albumin needs to be replaced parenterally to avoid disequilibrium, in recognition of the risk of post paracentesis circulatory collapse, most commonly indicated when > 5 liters of fluid is vacated.
Diuretics, salt and water restriction are frequently used.persistent leak (can be collected in stoma bag until heals, minimized with Z-track technique) 1circulatory collapse (minimized by replacing volume and albumin) 2bleeding (locally or intraperitoneal)localized infectionbowel perforationthe hepatorenal syndrome

Abdominal radiology curriculum for medical students is broadly split into content that refers to imaging (the test and findings) and conditions that are considered key for this stage of training.
Some non-abdominal conditions are included in this portion of the curriculum, including breast disease and vascular since they are managed by a predominantly surgical route.
It important to be aware of:CT intravenous contrastCT luminal contrasterect CXRperformed to exclude perforationAXRfirst line imaging in some centers for potential obstructionUS abdomengreat for the biliary tree and renal tractfirst line imaging investigation for deranged renal or liver functionideally the patient to be fasted for 4 hoursUS renalassessment of the renal tract (kidneys and bladder) onlyrequires the patient to have a full bladderCT abdomenhigh-dose examinationusually performed with IV contrasthigh sensitivity for perforation and obstructionfind the cause of obstructionexcellent for assessment of intra-abdominal infection/inflammationmass detection and characterizationperformed to exclude perforationfirst line imaging in some centers for potential obstructiongreat for the biliary tree and renal tractfirst line imaging investigation for deranged renal or liver functionideally the patient to be fasted for 4 hoursassessment of the renal tract (kidneys and bladder) onlyrequires the patient to have a full bladderhigh-dose examinationusually performed with IV contrasthigh sensitivity for perforation and obstructionfind the cause of obstructionexcellent for assessment of intra-abdominal infection/inflammationmass detection and characterization

Abdominal radiography can be useful in many settings.
Before the advent of computed tomography (CT) imaging, it was a primary means of investigating gastrointestinal pathology and often allowed indirect evaluation of other abdominal viscera.
IndicationsContraindicationsProjectionsProcedureRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAlthough abdominal radiography has lower sensitivity and specificity than a CT of the abdomen, it still serves a role as an adjunct or optional test.
Current uses for abdominal radiography include:a preliminary evaluation of bowel gas in an emergent settinga negative study in a low pretest probability patient may obviate the need for a CT study and therefore lower radiation doseevaluation of radiopaque tubes and linesevaluation for radiopaque foreign bodiesevaluation for postprocedural intraperitoneal/retroperitoneal free gasmonitoring the amount of bowel gas in postoperative ileusmonitoring the passage of contrast through the bowelcolonic transit studiesmonitoring renal calculia negative study in a low pretest probability patient may obviate the need for a CT study and therefore lower radiation dosepregnancy is a relative contraindication to the use of ionizing radiationnon-ionizing studies (e.g. ultrasound or MRI) should be tried firstabdominal radiographs administer a much lower radiation dose than CTnon-ionizing studies (e.g. ultrasound or MRI) should be tried firstabdominal radiographs administer a much lower radiation dose than CTAP supine viewcan be performed as a standalone projection or as part of an acute abdominal seriesPA erect viewoften taken with the supine view, when used together it is a valuable projection in assessing gas-fluid levels, and free gas in the abdominal cavity.can be performed as a standalone projection or as part of an acute abdominal seriesoften taken with the supine view, when used together it is a valuable projection in assessing gas-fluid levels, and free gas in the abdominal cavity.
Generally, plain radiograph examination of the abdomen comprises an AP supine and PA erect view, supplemented by a number of additional views as clinically indicated.lateral decubitus viewperformed as an alternative to the PA erect view to assess for free gas in the abdominal cavity lateral viewoften used as a problem-solving view during the identification and localization of foreign bodies  PA prone viewdorsal decubitus viewused when it is unsafe to perform both a PA erect or a lateral decubitus view, this projection requires no patient movement.oblique viewsused in barium studies and the location of foreign bodies and/or lines such as a Tenckhoff catheter performed as an alternative to the PA erect view to assess for free gas in the abdominal cavity often used as a problem-solving view during the identification and localization of foreign bodies  used when it is unsafe to perform both a PA erect or a lateral decubitus view, this projection requires no patient movement.used in barium studies and the location of foreign bodies and/or lines such as a Tenckhoff catheter The patient should be gowned with minimum clothing.
Radiopaque materials (zippers, belts, etc.)
should be removed.
If relevant, enteric tube suction should be avoided before the study.
Ideally, the patient's bladder should be emptied as well.
Abdominal radiographs may be obtained in the radiology department or may be performed portably.
Views should generally include either the diaphragm or inferior pubic ramus.
Gonadal shielding may be provided for men.
Portable abdominal radiographs may be necessary due to patient immobility but are of much poorer quality.
The kVp of the x-ray beam may be altered in order to bring out different aspects of the abdominal radiograph:lower kVp offers greater tissue contrast and better visualization of gas, but there is decreased penetration of the x-ray beamhigher kVp may be useful for evaluation of radiopaque objects (contrast, tubes, lines, etc.)

Abdominal surface anatomy can be described when viewed from in front of the abdomen in 2 ways:These regions and quadrants are of clinical importance when examining and describing pathologies related to the abdomenThe dividing planes are based on lines drawn between easily palpable bony points.
The horizontal planes are also of importance as they provide useful landmarks on cross-sectional imaging.
The two horizontal lines are:subcostal planecorresponds to a line drawn joining the lower most bony point of the rib cage, usually 10th costal cartilagebody of the L3 vertebra; the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery and 3rd part of the duodenum lie on this planetranstubercular planecorresponds to a line uniting the two tubercles of the iliac crestsupper border of the L5 vertebra and the confluence of the common iliac veins (i.e. IVC origin) lie on this planecorresponds to a line drawn joining the lower most bony point of the rib cage, usually 10th costal cartilagebody of the L3 vertebra; the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery and 3rd part of the duodenum lie on this planecorresponds to a line uniting the two tubercles of the iliac crestsupper border of the L5 vertebra and the confluence of the common iliac veins (i.e. IVC origin) lie on this planeThe two vertical planes are similar on each side and follow a line joining the mid clavicular point to the mid inguinal point.
It passes just lateral to the tip of the ninth costal cartilage, which is palpable as a distinct step along the costal margin.
It roughly corresponds to the lateral border of the rectus abdominis muscle.
The above lines intersect and divide the abdomen into nine regions (clockwise from the top):epigastric region (epigastrium)left hypochondrium (LHC)left lumbar region (left flank)left iliac fossa (LIF)suprapubic (hypogastric) regionright iliac fossa (RIF)right lumbar region (right flank)right hypochondrium (RHC)and in the center, the umbilical regionThe dividing plane is a horizontal line drawn through the umbilicus.
The vertical line is down the midline of the body, overlying the linea alba from the xiphoid to the pubic symphysis.
The above lines intersect and divide the abdomen into four quadrants (clockwise from the top):right upper quadrant fossa (RUQ)right lower quadrant fossa (RLQ)left lower quadrant fossa (LLQ)left upper quadrant fossa (LUQ)

Abdominal trauma is usually divided into blunt and penetrating trauma.haemoperitoneumsplenic trauma: most commonhepatic traumarenal traumapancreatic traumagastrointestinal tract (bowel) trauma:proximal jejunum is most commonly affected by blunt trauma, followed by the duodenum and ascending colon at the ileocecal valve regiondescending colon is only rarely involvedless common abdominal trauma injuries:gallbladderureterstomachadrenalurinary bladder traumavascular trauma: abdominal aortic injury and other major abdominal and pelvic vessel injuries (e.g. inferior vena cava, renal vessels, celiac axis, superior mesenteric vessels, lumbar vessels, and iliac vessels)abdominal wall traumadiaphragmatic ruptureretroperitoneal hemorrhage hypoperfusion complexproximal jejunum is most commonly affected by blunt trauma, followed by the duodenum and ascending colon at the ileocecal valve regiondescending colon is only rarely involvedgallbladderureterstomachadrenal

Abdominal radiographs can be a useful examination, but you need to think about the question you are asking before getting the test.
Before the advent of computerized tomography (CT) imaging, it was a primary means of investigating gastrointestinal pathology (and often allowed indirect evaluation of other abdominal viscera).
Reference articleSummarySimilar testsRelated articlesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; read more in our article on abdominal radiography.indications (acute)emergent evaluation of bowel gasnegative study in some patients may obviate the need for CTevaluation of radiopaque lines and tubesevaluation of radiopaque foreign bodiesevaluation of postprocedural free gasevaluation of bowel gas in postoperative ileusimportant pathologybowel obstructionsigmoid volvulusbenefitsquick and accessiblelimitationsmodest radiation dose low sensitivity and specificity for intra-abdominal pathologypregnancy is a relative contraindicationprocedurepatient is supineradiograph is performed AP (anteroposterior)performed in the radiology departmentmobile abdominal radiographs are poor qualityonly performed mobile if the patient is very illemergent evaluation of bowel gasnegative study in some patients may obviate the need for CTevaluation of radiopaque lines and tubesevaluation of radiopaque foreign bodiesevaluation of postprocedural free gasevaluation of bowel gas in postoperative ileusnegative study in some patients may obviate the need for CTbowel obstructionsigmoid volvulusquick and accessiblemodest radiation dose low sensitivity and specificity for intra-abdominal pathologypregnancy is a relative contraindicationpatient is supineradiograph is performed AP (anteroposterior)performed in the radiology departmentmobile abdominal radiographs are poor qualityonly performed mobile if the patient is very illmobile abdominal radiographs are poor qualityonly performed mobile if the patient is very illUS abdomenperformed for specific indicationsuseful for gallstonesuseful for liver and renal pathologyCT abdomenfar more sensitive and specific for intra-abdominal pathologysignificantly greater radiation doseperformed for specific indicationsuseful for gallstonesuseful for liver and renal pathologyuseful for gallstonesuseful for liver and renal pathologyfar more sensitive and specific for intra-abdominal pathologysignificantly greater radiation dose

Abdominal radiographs can be challenging examinations to look at.
It is always best to approach radiographs in a systematic way.
Bowel gas patternAbdominal organsCalcification/artifactsBones and jointsPlaylistRelated articlesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisGas within the bowel forms a natural contrast with surrounding tissues since it has a very low density.
Bowel can only be seen if it contains air/gas.
If it is completely fluid-filled, bowel will be indistinguishable from its surroundings.stomachleft of midline, beneath hemidiaphragmsometimes just a small volume of gas in the fundusdo not mistake a rim of gas for pneumoperitoneumsmall bowelless than 3 cm widetends to be centralonly seen if it contains gasmucosal folds (valvulae conniventes) traverse the bowel lumen and are closely-spacedlarge bowelless than 6 cm wide, cecum and sigmoid up to 9 cmperipheralascending and descending colon in fixed positions laterallytransverse colon and sigmoid variable position on a mesenteryhaustral folds do not go all the way across the lumen and are widely-spacedcontains feces - mottled appearanceleft of midline, beneath hemidiaphragmsometimes just a small volume of gas in the fundusdo not mistake a rim of gas for pneumoperitoneumless than 3 cm widetends to be centralonly seen if it contains gasmucosal folds (valvulae conniventes) traverse the bowel lumen and are closely-spacedless than 6 cm wide, cecum and sigmoid up to 9 cmperipheralascending and descending colon in fixed positions laterallytransverse colon and sigmoid variable position on a mesenteryhaustral folds do not go all the way across the lumen and are widely-spacedcontains feces - mottled appearanceIn general terms, small bowel should measure less than 3 cm, large bowel less than 6 cm and the cecum and sigmoid colon should measure less than 9 cm.
If the bowel measures greater than this, there is bowel dilatation - think mechanical obstruction or adynamic ileus.
A supine radiograph is not the best test to do to look for free gas (look for an erect chest radiograph).
However, with practice, it is possible to see free gas within the peritoneal cavity.
Gas outside bowel will make bowel wall much easier to detect because loops with gas on either side of the bowel wall are seen very clearly.
See pneumoperitoneum.
Become a Radiopaedia Supporter and go Ad-Free The parenchymal organs within the abdomen absorb x-rays as they pass through the patient and therefore alter the appearance of the radiograph.
These changes are subtle, but with practice, you should be able to make out several organs and muscles.liverright upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragm and past the midlinespleenleft upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragmpsoas major musclessymmetrical triangles either side of the lumbar spinenarrowest near the diaphragm, widest at the pelviskidneyssit on the psoas major musclesoften just see the rounded lower polelung basespulmonary vessels in the bases projected over upper abdomenright upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragm and past the midlineleft upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragmsymmetrical triangles either side of the lumbar spinenarrowest near the diaphragm, widest at the pelvissit on the psoas major musclesoften just see the rounded lower polepulmonary vessels in the bases projected over upper abdomenLook out for abnormal calcification and metal in or on the abdomen.
It is worthwhile looking specifically for an abnormal density and working out what it represents.pathological calcificationsvascular, e.g. aorta, splenic artery, phlebolithsrenal tract: renal calculi, ureteric calculi, bladder calculicalcified gallstones in right upper quadrantuterine fibroidscalcified mesenteric lymph nodeshepatic/splenic granulomapancreatic: usually chronic pancreatitisgluteal injection site granulomaiatrogeniclines and tubesnasogastric/nasojejunal tubes (NGT/NJT)ECG leadsesophageal stentPEG/ileostomy/colostomy tube (and bag)femoral linenephrostomy and cholecystostomy tubesbiliary and urinary stentsurethral catheterTenckhoff catheter for peritoneal dialysispenile implantsurgicalsurgical clips, e.g. cholecystectomy, sleeve gastrectomy, nephrectomy, pelvic surgeryvascular clipsanastomosis suturesembolization coilsLAGB band, tube, and portaortic/iliac stent graftscolonic transit study ringsskin staplesintrauterine device (IUD)vaginal pessaryorthopedic hardware, e.g. posterior spinal fusion, distraction rods, plates and screws for pelvic fractures, total hip replacement, femoral neck fixation devices (dynamic hip screw, intramedullary nail with cannulated screw)spinal electrodeclothing/jewelry artifactsbody piercings (e.g. navel, nipple)metal from clothing, e.g. metal rings from jogging bottoms, beads, sequinsmetal objects in shirt/trouser pockets: cellphone, car keys, lighter, penprinted shirtsvascular, e.g. aorta, splenic artery, phlebolithsrenal tract: renal calculi, ureteric calculi, bladder calculicalcified gallstones in right upper quadrantuterine fibroidscalcified mesenteric lymph nodeshepatic/splenic granulomapancreatic: usually chronic pancreatitisgluteal injection site granulomalines and tubesnasogastric/nasojejunal tubes (NGT/NJT)ECG leadsesophageal stentPEG/ileostomy/colostomy tube (and bag)femoral linenephrostomy and cholecystostomy tubesbiliary and urinary stentsurethral catheterTenckhoff catheter for peritoneal dialysispenile implantsurgicalsurgical clips, e.g. cholecystectomy, sleeve gastrectomy, nephrectomy, pelvic surgeryvascular clipsanastomosis suturesembolization coilsLAGB band, tube, and portaortic/iliac stent graftscolonic transit study ringsskin staplesintrauterine device (IUD)vaginal pessaryorthopedic hardware, e.g. posterior spinal fusion, distraction rods, plates and screws for pelvic fractures, total hip replacement, femoral neck fixation devices (dynamic hip screw, intramedullary nail with cannulated screw)spinal electrodenasogastric/nasojejunal tubes (NGT/NJT)ECG leadsesophageal stentPEG/ileostomy/colostomy tube (and bag)femoral linenephrostomy and cholecystostomy tubesbiliary and urinary stentsurethral catheterTenckhoff catheter for peritoneal dialysispenile implantsurgical clips, e.g. cholecystectomy, sleeve gastrectomy, nephrectomy, pelvic surgeryvascular clipsanastomosis suturesembolization coilsLAGB band, tube, and portaortic/iliac stent graftscolonic transit study ringsskin staplesintrauterine device (IUD)vaginal pessaryorthopedic hardware, e.g. posterior spinal fusion, distraction rods, plates and screws for pelvic fractures, total hip replacement, femoral neck fixation devices (dynamic hip screw, intramedullary nail with cannulated screw)spinal electrodebody piercings (e.g. navel, nipple)metal from clothing, e.g. metal rings from jogging bottoms, beads, sequinsmetal objects in shirt/trouser pockets: cellphone, car keys, lighter, penprinted shirtsBecome a Radiopaedia Supporter and go Ad-Free A host of bones and joints can be seen on an abdominal radiograph.spinelower thoracic and lumbar spine should be of similar heightintervertebral disc spaces should be similarspinous processes should be visiblelower ribssacrum and pelvislower thoracic and lumbar spine should be of similar heightintervertebral disc spaces should be similarspinous processes should be visibleSacroiliac joints and hip joints are often visualized on abdominal radiographs.
Make sure that you look at the bones to check for other causes of abdominal pain.
Evidence of diskitis, bony metastases etc.
Example normal cases: playlist

Abdominal x-ray review is a key competency for medical students, junior doctors and other allied health professionals.
Using ABDO X is a helpful and systematic method for abdominal x-ray review, where A refers to the assessment of the presence and location of air.
Reference articleSummaryRelated articlesRelated articlesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.introductionair should only be within bowel loopsfree peritoneal air is known as pneumoperitoneumerect chest x-rays are more sensitive to the presence of pneumoperitoneum than abdominal x-rayshowever, there are some key signs on abdominal x-rays of a pneumoperitoneumprocedurelook at the wall of the bowel - is it seen as a crisply defined thin white line (Rigler's sign)?
can you see small triangles of air between bowel loops?can you see the falciform ligament outlined by gas on either side?does the liver look more lucent than expected?other signs of pneumoperitoneum are listed here air should only be within bowel loopsfree peritoneal air is known as pneumoperitoneumerect chest x-rays are more sensitive to the presence of pneumoperitoneum than abdominal x-rayshowever, there are some key signs on abdominal x-rays of a pneumoperitoneumlook at the wall of the bowel - is it seen as a crisply defined thin white line (Rigler's sign)?
can you see small triangles of air between bowel loops?can you see the falciform ligament outlined by gas on either side?does the liver look more lucent than expected?other signs of pneumoperitoneum are listed here

Abdominal x-ray review is a key competency for medical students, junior doctors and other allied health professionals.
Using ABDO X is a helpful and systematic method for abdominal x-ray review, where X refers to the assessment of external objects and artifacts.
Reference articleSummaryRelated articlesRelated articlesThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.introductionnumerous different types of foreign bodies and artifacts, both medical and non-medical, can be seen on an abdominal radiographprocedureidentify any artifacts or foreign bodies on the radiographcorrelate the finding with the clinical history provided, or seek further clarification from the referrer to help identify the objecttry to localize the object to the abdominal wall or within the abdominal cavityclothing or jewelry are commonly identified, these include:navel/nipple piercingmetal from clothing, e.g. metal rings from jogging bottoms, beads, sequinsmetal objects in shirt/trouser pockets: cellphone, car keys, lighter, penprinted shirtsmany objects are placed iatrogenically, some are the result of misadventurenumerous different types of foreign bodies and artifacts, both medical and non-medical, can be seen on an abdominal radiographidentify any artifacts or foreign bodies on the radiographcorrelate the finding with the clinical history provided, or seek further clarification from the referrer to help identify the objecttry to localize the object to the abdominal wall or within the abdominal cavityclothing or jewelry are commonly identified, these include:navel/nipple piercingmetal from clothing, e.g. metal rings from jogging bottoms, beads, sequinsmetal objects in shirt/trouser pockets: cellphone, car keys, lighter, penprinted shirtsmany objects are placed iatrogenically, some are the result of misadventurenavel/nipple piercingmetal from clothing, e.g. metal rings from jogging bottoms, beads, sequinsmetal objects in shirt/trouser pockets: cellphone, car keys, lighter, penprinted shirts

Abdominal x-ray review is a key competency for medical students, junior doctors and other allied health professionals.
Using ABDO X is a helpful and systematic method for abdominal x-ray review, where B refers to the assessment of the bowel loops.
Reference articleSummaryRelated articlesRelated articlesThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.introductionstomach, small bowel and large bowel may be differentiated on an abdominal x-raypathological features to detect include bowel dilatation, bowel loop displacement and bowel wall thickeningprocedurethe stomach usually appears thick-walled and lies in the left upper quadrant, and may contain the tip of a nasogastric tubecan you identify the small and large bowel?
Use these features:the small bowel usually lies centrally, has folds than run all the way across the diameter of the lumen (valvulae conniventes) and usually contains a small volume of airthe large bowel lies peripherally, has folds that run part of the way across the diameter of the lumen (haustral folds) and usually contains some air and fecal matteris the bowel dilated?
the 3-6-9 rule refers to the approximate allowable diameter (in centimeters) of the small bowel, large bowel and cecumare the bowel loops are clustered centrally with hazy homogeneous opacification of the rest of the abdomen?this is an indication that there may be ascitesis the wall of the large bowel thickened and undulating in its contour?this is known as thumbprinting and indicates colonic wall edema which may be due to infection, inflammation or ischemiastomach, small bowel and large bowel may be differentiated on an abdominal x-raypathological features to detect include bowel dilatation, bowel loop displacement and bowel wall thickeningthe stomach usually appears thick-walled and lies in the left upper quadrant, and may contain the tip of a nasogastric tubecan you identify the small and large bowel?
Use these features:the small bowel usually lies centrally, has folds than run all the way across the diameter of the lumen (valvulae conniventes) and usually contains a small volume of airthe large bowel lies peripherally, has folds that run part of the way across the diameter of the lumen (haustral folds) and usually contains some air and fecal matteris the bowel dilated?
the 3-6-9 rule refers to the approximate allowable diameter (in centimeters) of the small bowel, large bowel and cecumare the bowel loops are clustered centrally with hazy homogeneous opacification of the rest of the abdomen?this is an indication that there may be ascitesis the wall of the large bowel thickened and undulating in its contour?this is known as thumbprinting and indicates colonic wall edema which may be due to infection, inflammation or ischemiathe small bowel usually lies centrally, has folds than run all the way across the diameter of the lumen (valvulae conniventes) and usually contains a small volume of airthe large bowel lies peripherally, has folds that run part of the way across the diameter of the lumen (haustral folds) and usually contains some air and fecal matterthe 3-6-9 rule refers to the approximate allowable diameter (in centimeters) of the small bowel, large bowel and cecumthis is an indication that there may be ascitesthis is known as thumbprinting and indicates colonic wall edema which may be due to infection, inflammation or ischemia

Abdominal x-ray review is a key competency for medical students, junior doctors and other allied health professionals.
Using ABDO X is a helpful and systematic method for abdominal x-ray review, where D refers to the assessment of dense structures such as the bones and areas of calcification.
Reference articleSummaryRelated articlesRelated articlesThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.introductionseveral bony structures are visible on an abdominal x-ray and should be evaluated carefullycalcification may also be visible and may provide a clue as to the cause of the patient's symptoms and signsprocedureevaluate all of the bones visible on the x-ray as you would on any other x-raylook at the contours, density, trabecular pattern, areas of lysis or sclerosisyou may see the lower thoracic vertebral bodies, all of the lumbar vertebral bodies, sacrum, iliac blades, ischium, femoral heads and necks, and lowest ribsexamine the renal shadows and paths of the ureters for small densities which indicate stonesgallstones are radioopaque in approximately 15-20% of casessmall pelvic calcifications are likely to be phlebolithscalcified lymph nodes are also sometimes identifiedother calcifications include:vascular, e.g. aorta, splenic artery, phlebolithsuterine fibroidscalcified mesenteric lymph nodeshepatic/splenic granulomagluteal injection site granulomaseveral bony structures are visible on an abdominal x-ray and should be evaluated carefullycalcification may also be visible and may provide a clue as to the cause of the patient's symptoms and signsevaluate all of the bones visible on the x-ray as you would on any other x-raylook at the contours, density, trabecular pattern, areas of lysis or sclerosisyou may see the lower thoracic vertebral bodies, all of the lumbar vertebral bodies, sacrum, iliac blades, ischium, femoral heads and necks, and lowest ribsexamine the renal shadows and paths of the ureters for small densities which indicate stonesgallstones are radioopaque in approximately 15-20% of casessmall pelvic calcifications are likely to be phlebolithscalcified lymph nodes are also sometimes identifiedother calcifications include:vascular, e.g. aorta, splenic artery, phlebolithsuterine fibroidscalcified mesenteric lymph nodeshepatic/splenic granulomagluteal injection site granulomalook at the contours, density, trabecular pattern, areas of lysis or sclerosisyou may see the lower thoracic vertebral bodies, all of the lumbar vertebral bodies, sacrum, iliac blades, ischium, femoral heads and necks, and lowest ribsvascular, e.g. aorta, splenic artery, phlebolithsuterine fibroidscalcified mesenteric lymph nodeshepatic/splenic granulomagluteal injection site granuloma

Abdominal x-ray review is a key competency for medical students, junior doctors and other allied health professionals.
Using ABDO X is a helpful and systematic method for abdominal x-ray review:A: air - where it should and shouldn't beB: bowel - position, size and wall thicknessD: dense structures, calcification and bonesO: organs and soft tissuesX: eXternal objects and artifactsThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.
Air should only be seen within the lumen of the bowel.
Erect chest x-rays are more sensitive than abdominal radiographs to the presence of free intraperitoneal air.
Signs of pneumoperitoneum on abdominal radiographs include:falciform ligament signRigler signfootball signabdominal x-ray assessment of airNormal small bowel:is located centrally within the abdomenhas folds running across the diameter of the lumen known as the valvulae conniventesusually contains a small volume of air.
Normal large bowel:is located peripherallyhas folds that run part of the way across known as the haustral foldsusually contains some air or fecal matter.
In the presence of ascites, the bowel loops are clustered centrally.
The 3-6-9 rule refers to an approximate maximum size in centimeters of the small bowel, large bowel and cecum respectively.
Small bowel wall thickening is difficult to appreciate on plain radiography, whereas thickening of the large bowel is represented by thumbprinting.abdominal x-ray assessment of bowelExamine carefully all of the bones visible on abdominal radiographs:lowest ribsvertebral column pelvic bonesfemoral heads and necksCalcification within organs may be detected - in particular, look carefully for calcified renal tract or gallbladder stones.abdominal x-ray assessment of densitiesAbdominal radiographs are a blunt instrument for critical evaluation of the solid organs but information regarding pathological changes in size may be gleaned.
The fat surrounding organs provides an interface which allows their contour to be seen.
Remember to examine the lung bases for consolidation (which can cause abdominal pain) and the inguinal regions for signs of herniae.abdominal x-ray assessment of organs and soft tissuesA multitude of medical devices and foreign bodies may be detected on an abdominal radiograph.abdominal x-ray assessment of external objects and artifacts

Abdominal x-ray review is a key competency for medical students, junior doctors and other allied health professionals.
Using ABDO X is a helpful and systematic method for abdominal x-ray review, where O refers to the assessment of the intra-abdominal organs and soft tissues.
Reference articleSummaryRelated articlesRelated articlesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.introductionabdominal radiographs are a blunt instrument for the evaluation of the abdominal organs due to the lack of soft tissue contrast resolutionthe outline of the organs is visible due to the difference in density between the organ and the adjacent intra-abdominal fatalthough not the reason for acquiring the radiograph, organomegaly may be seenthe soft tissues outside of the abdominal cavity, such as the lung bases and the inguinal regions, should also be carefully evaluated as they may contain abnormal findings that could explain abdominal symptomsprocedurelook for the outline of the liver, kidneys and spleen in the upper abdomenliverright upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragm and past the midlinespleenleft upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragmpsoas musclesymmetrical triangles either side of the lumbar spinenarrowest near the diaphragm, widest at the pelviskidneyssit on the psoas musclesoften just see the rounded lower polelung basespulmonary vessels in the bases projected over upper abdomenhepatomegaly is inferred when there is extension of the right lobe inferior to the lower pole of the right kidneysplenomegaly and renomegaly are subjective radiograph findings as there are no reliable objective criterialook at the lung bases for signs of airspace opacification; pneumonia may present with abdominal painlook for bowel gas in the inguinal regions as a sign of a hernia causing bowel obstructionabdominal radiographs are a blunt instrument for the evaluation of the abdominal organs due to the lack of soft tissue contrast resolutionthe outline of the organs is visible due to the difference in density between the organ and the adjacent intra-abdominal fatalthough not the reason for acquiring the radiograph, organomegaly may be seenthe soft tissues outside of the abdominal cavity, such as the lung bases and the inguinal regions, should also be carefully evaluated as they may contain abnormal findings that could explain abdominal symptomslook for the outline of the liver, kidneys and spleen in the upper abdomenliverright upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragm and past the midlinespleenleft upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragmpsoas musclesymmetrical triangles either side of the lumbar spinenarrowest near the diaphragm, widest at the pelviskidneyssit on the psoas musclesoften just see the rounded lower polelung basespulmonary vessels in the bases projected over upper abdomenhepatomegaly is inferred when there is extension of the right lobe inferior to the lower pole of the right kidneysplenomegaly and renomegaly are subjective radiograph findings as there are no reliable objective criterialook at the lung bases for signs of airspace opacification; pneumonia may present with abdominal painlook for bowel gas in the inguinal regions as a sign of a hernia causing bowel obstructionright upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragm and past the midlineleft upper quadrantextends to the hemidiaphragmsymmetrical triangles either side of the lumbar spinenarrowest near the diaphragm, widest at the pelvissit on the psoas musclesoften just see the rounded lower polepulmonary vessels in the bases projected over upper abdomen

Abdominoschisis (plural: abdominoschises) refers to a split or defect in the abdominal wall.
Some authors use the term synonymously with a gastroschisis.
When the defect continues into the thoracic region it is termed a thoracoabdominoschisis.
A large abdominoschisis is considered part of the limb body wall complex 2.fetal anterior abdominal wall defects

The abducens nerve is the sixth cranial nerve.
It courses from its nucleus located in the dorsal pons to its innervation of the lateral rectus muscle and can be divided into four parts:The abducens nucleus is a small nucleus situated at the upper part of the rhomboid fossa beneath the colliculus facialis within the pons.
It is the most medial of the nerves emerging immediately below the pons (facial nerve and vestibulocochlear nerve lateral to it) at the pontomedullary junction into the prepontine cistern.
It courses anteriorly towards the clivus where it runs superiorly along the clivus enclosed within a fibrous sheath called Dorello canal and pierces the dura inferior to the posterior clinoid process.
It then courses over the medial petrous apex towards the cavernous sinus.
Its oblique course and relatively anchored position in Dorello canal make it prone to stretching when raised intracranial pressure from a space-occupying lesion causes transtentorial herniation (a sixth nerve palsy is the classic lateralizing sign of an extradural hematoma).Within the cavernous sinus, the abducens nerve is located inferolateral to the internal carotid artery, medial to the lateral wall of the sinus.
Having entered the orbit through the superior orbital fissure within the tendinous ring (see Figure 3) it supplies the lateral rectus.
It is the most inferior nerve passing through the tendinous ring, inferior to the inferior division of the oculomotor nerve.sixth nerve palsy

Abducens nerve palsies, or sixth nerve palsies, results in weakness of the ipsilateral lateral rectus muscle.
Clinical presentationPathologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresPatients present with horizontal diplopia with an inability to abduct the ipsilateral eye, thereby resulting in an esotropia (nasal deviation of the eye).The abducens nerve has the longest subarachnoid course of all the cranial nerves.increased intracranial pressureresults in downward displacement of the brainstem, causing stretching of the sixth nerve secondary to its location within Dorello's canalmicrovascular (e.g. diabetes mellitus)subarachnoid space pathology (e.g. subarachnoid hemorrhage, meningitis, neurosarcoidosis, neoplasm)cavernous sinus pathology (e.g. cavernous sinus thrombosis)pontine pathology (e.g. stroke, neoplasm, multiple sclerosis)traumaresults in downward displacement of the brainstem, causing stretching of the sixth nerve secondary to its location within Dorello's canaloculomotor nerve palsytrochlear nerve palsy

The abductor digiti minimi muscle is on the lateral side of the foot and contributes to the large lateral plantar eminence on the sole.origin: lateral and medial processes of calcaneal tuberosity, and band of connective tissue connecting calcaneus with base of metatarsal Vinsertion: lateral side of base of proximal phalanx of little toeaction: abducts little toe at metatarsophalangeal jointarterial supply: lateral plantar arteryinnervation: lateral plantar nerve from tibial nerveThe abductor digiti minimi muscle is involved in Baxter neuropathy.

The abductor digiti minimi muscle overlies the opponens digiti minimi, within the hypothenar eminence, and is one of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.
Occasionally an accessory abductor digiti minimi muscle of the hand is present.origin: pisiform, pisohamate ligament, and tendon of flexor carpi ulnarisinsertion: 5th proximal phalanxaction: abducts 5th finger at metacarpophalangeal jointarterial supply: ulnar arteryinnervation: deep branch of ulnar nerve

The abductor hallucis muscle forms the medial margin of the foot and contributes to a soft tissue bulge on the medial side of the sole.origin: medial process of calcaneal tuberosityinsertion: medial side of base of proximal phalanx of great toeaction: abducts and flexes great toe at metatarsophalangeal jointarterial supply: medial plantar arteryinnervation: medial plantar nerve from tibial nervehypertrophic abductor hallucis muscleBaxter's neuropathy

The abductor pollicis longus (APL) is a muscle found in the deep layer of the posterior compartment of the forearm.
As it descends, it becomes superficial and passes under the extensor retinaculum and through the 1st extensor compartment of the wrist before attaching distally.
It is one of the extrinsic muscles of the hand.origin: posterior surfaces of ulna, radius and interosseous membraneinsertion: via tendon, usually dividing into two slips, one attaching to the base of 1st metacarpal, the other attaching to the trapeziumarterial supply: proximally by the posterior interosseous artery and distally by a branch from the anterior interosseous arteryinnervation: posterior interosseous nerve (C7 and C8), a continuation of the deep branch of the radial nerve (C7, C8)action: abducts and extends the thumb at the carpometacarpal jointpresence of multiple slips instead of a single APL tendon 4 a vertical septum spliting the 1st extensor compartment into two distinct subcompartments (i.e. APL lies in its own tunnel) 4.

The abductor pollicis brevis muscle is a thin subcutaneous muscle located laterally in the thenar eminence of the hand, and is one of the intrinsic muscles of the hand.origin: mainly from the flexor retinaculumfew fibers originate from the tubercles of scaphoid and trapezium and tendon of abductor pollicis longusaccessory slips may originate from the long and short pollicial extensors (extensor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis), the opponens pollicis or radial styloid processinsertion: its medial fibers are attached by a thin, flat tendon to the radial side of the proximal phalangeal base in the pollex and lateral fibers join the pollicial dorsal digital expansioninnervation: lateral branch of median nerve (C8 and T1)action: abducts the thumb and medially rotates it at the carpometacarpal and metacarpophalangeal jointsfew fibers originate from the tubercles of scaphoid and trapezium and tendon of abductor pollicis longusaccessory slips may originate from the long and short pollicial extensors (extensor pollicis longus and extensor pollicis brevis), the opponens pollicis or radial styloid process

The ABER position relates to MR arthrography of the shoulder joint and is a mnemonic for ABduction and External Rotation.
In this position, labral tears are made conspicuous by tightening the inferior glenohumeral labroligamentous complex (which are also the most important glenohumeral ligaments in preventing shoulder instability).To attain this position, the patient's pertinent hand is placed behind the head or neck.

Abernethy malformations are rare vascular anomalies of the splanchnic venous system.
They consist of congenital portosystemic shunts and result from persistence of the embryonic vessels.
EpidemiologyPathologyHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresType I malformations are thought to occur only in females, while type II have a male predominance 1.There are two main types of Abernethy malformations that have been described (initially devised by G Morgan and R Superina 6):type I: end-to-end shuntstype II: side-to-side shuntsIn type I shunts (end-to-end), there is a congenital absence of the portal vein with a complete diversion of portal blood into systemic veins (inferior vena cava, renal veins, or iliac veins).
These are further subdivided into:type Ia: separate drainage of the superior mesenteric vein and splenic vein into systemic veinstype Ib: superior mesenteric vein and splenic vein join to form a short extra-hepatic portal vein which drains into a systemic vein (inferior vena cava, right atrium or iliac veins)In type II shunts (side-to-side), there is a hypoplastic portal vein with portal blood diversion into the inferior vena cava through a side-to-side, extrahepatic communication.hepatic encephalopathy: from portosystemic shuntinghepatic mass lesions focal nodular hyperplasia: thought to generate due to the absence of the portal veinhepatocellular carcinomahepatoblastomahepatopulmonary syndrome 2pulmonary arteriovenous fistulaethought to arise due to hyperammonemiamay lead to systemic emboliother congenital abnormalities, particularly associated with type I 1 :congenital cardiac anomaliesbiliary atresiapolyspleniafocal nodular hyperplasia: thought to generate due to the absence of the portal veinhepatocellular carcinomahepatoblastomathought to arise due to hyperammonemiamay lead to systemic embolicongenital cardiac anomaliesbiliary atresiapolyspleniaNamed after John Abernethy, who gave the first account of an absent portal vein with accompanying congenital mesentericocaval shunt 1,5 in 1793.

Aberrant arachnoid granulations are arachnoid granulations that penetrated the dura but failed to migrate normally in the venous sinus.
They are most often located in the greater wing of the sphenoid bone.
Occasionally, they are seen in the posterior temporal bone wall.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesAlthough mostly an incidental finding, cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea is the characteristic clinical presentation when symptomatic.
Aberrant arachnoid granulations can be seen at the floor of the anterior and middle cranial fossa and, less frequently, at the posterior temporal bone wall.
They contain cerebrospinal fluid but do not communicate with the dural venous sinuses.
Instead, the pressure of the cerebrospinal fluid will cause bone erosion.
As they grow, these arachnoid granulations can cause defects in the posterior temporal bone wall or the tegmen tympani.
Thus, cerebrospinal fluid otorrhea can occur.
Arachnoid granulations in this specific location may also potentially spread bacterial infection to the meninges.
In this context, it is important to report their presence, especially since they are known to enlarge with age.
Sometimes an incidental finding, they are characterized by multiple CSF isodense focal bone erosions in the sphenoid bone bilaterally.
A direct communication with the paranasal sinuses may be seen.
HRCT temporal bone reveals erosions along the posterior wall, without bone spicules and often with a lobulated surface.
Focal dural rim enhancement may be seen on CECT.If large, the arachnoid granulations may be outpouching in the sphenoid sinus.
T1: hypointense on T1 (isointense to CSF)T2: hyperintense on T2 (isointense to CSF)T1 C+ (Gd): faint dural rim enhancement may be seenImaging differentials of temporal bone aberrant arachnoid granulations include:endolymphatic sac tumors: it shows heterogeneous signal intensities on T1- and T2-weighted images with typically focal high T1 signal intensities due to hemorrhagic and proteinaceous components and heterogeneously enhancing on postcontrast imageschordomaparagangliomametastasischondromatous tumors4

Aberrant internal carotid artery is a variant of the internal carotid artery and represents a collateral pathway resulting from involution of the normal cervical portion (first embryonic segment) of the internal carotid artery 5.Gross anatomyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThere is consequent enlargement of the usually small collaterals which course through the middle ear, appearing as an artery that passes lateral to the cochlear promontory.
The two vessels that enlarge to form the aberrant internal carotid artery are:inferior tympanic artery: a branch of the external carotid artery (usually ascending pharyngeal artery) which enters from below via the inferior tympanic canaliculuscaroticotympanic artery: a branch of the petrous portion of the internal carotid artery known as the hyoid artery when enlargedThe vessels rejoin the horizontal segment of the petrous portion of the internal carotid artery.
The anomaly may be associated with a persistent stapedial artery 7.Patients may present with pulsatile tinnitus, particularly if there is stenosis in the vessel.
On otoscopic examination, it appears as a retrotympanic vascular mass.
If mistaken for a paraganglioma and biopsied, the results can be disastrous.
Findings of aberrant internal carotid artery on CT include:enlarged inferior tympanic canaliculus within the caroticojugular spine with small vessel traversing itretrotympanic mass, as vessel enters the posterior mesotympanum and courses across the inferior cochlear promontory to the anterior mesotympanumabsent carotid plate, as vessel connects to the normal horizontal portion of the petrous internal carotid arteryabsent or hypoplastic vertical segment of the carotid canalCharacteristic findings of aberrant internal carotid artery on angiography include:enlarged tympanic branch of ascending pharyngeal arterymore lateral and posterior route of petrous part of internal carotid artery than usuallateral extension of the internal carotid artery well (pinched contour of the vessel) beyond the vestibular line of Lapayowkerlateralized internal carotid artery: protrudes into the anterior mesotympanum but does not course across the cochlear promontory from the posterior mesotympanum nor enlarge the inferior tympanic canaliculus  7aneurysm of the petrous segment of the internal carotid arteryglomus tympanicumglomus jugularedehiscent jugular bulb

Aberrant left pulmonary artery, also known as pulmonary sling, represents an anatomical variant characterized by the left pulmonary artery arising from the right pulmonary artery and passing above the right main bronchus and in between the trachea and esophagus to reach the left lung.
It may lead to compression and focal stenosis of the trachea.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresRespiratory distress predominates over esophageal symptoms, usually presenting early in the neonatal period.
Aberrant left pulmonary arteries are thought to arise from a failure of formation of the 6th aortic arch.
They have an anomalous origin from the posterior wall of the right pulmonary artery before coursing to the left lung passing posterior to the trachea and anterior to the esophagus.
The term “sling” is best used when the proximal portion of the anomalous vessel impinges on the right main bronchus and causes air trapping of the entire right lung, or right middle or lower lobes.
The second type of aberrant left pulmonary artery, which often is fatal, is associated with long-segment tracheal stenosis.
This kind of tracheal stenosis is due to complete tracheal rings.
Other anomalies that can be associated with aberrant left pulmonary artery are:head and neckabsent thyroid isthmusthoraciccomplete tracheal ringstracheal stenosissingle lobed left lungbilobed right lungcongenital lobar overinflation 5abdominopelvicimperforate anusHirschsprung diseaseintestinal malrotationagenesis of left kidney and ureteragenesis of gallbladdermusculoskeletalfusion of third and fourth lumbar vertebraediaphragmatic herniaabsent thyroid isthmuscomplete tracheal ringstracheal stenosissingle lobed left lungbilobed right lungcongenital lobar overinflation 5imperforate anusHirschsprung diseaseintestinal malrotationagenesis of left kidney and ureteragenesis of gallbladderfusion of third and fourth lumbar vertebraediaphragmatic herniaConventional radiographs obtained in neonates at birth may show fetal fluid retention or air, with a mediastinal shift usually to the left side.
In adults, a left-sided deviation of the trachea and an anterior bowing of the right main stem bronchus may be seen.
In cases of ring sling complex, radiographs often show an absence of unilateral pulmonary aeration.
In most instances, the barium esophagogram characteristically shows a mass between the trachea and the esophagus just above the level of the carina, usually seen as an anterior indentation over the esophagus.
The main bronchi have horizontal courses (i.e. low T-shaped carina), and vascular anatomy is normally well delineated on CT or MR angiography.
Atelectasis may be seen in the upper lobes.
Repositioning of the artery usually reverses compression, particularly when the underlying tracheobronchial tree is normal.
The mortality rate is high in patients requiring tracheal reconstruction because the stenosis is primary and not due to the vessel.
The success of reconstructive procedures in the rigid trachea can be studied by using three-dimensional CT techniques such as virtual bronchoscopy.it is the only vascular ring to pass between the trachea and esophagus it compresses the trachea posteriorly and causes anterior impression over the esophagus on lateral radiographs

Aberrant right subclavian arteries (ARSA), also known as arteria lusoria, are one of the commonest of the aortic arch anomalies.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe estimated incidence is 0.5-2%.They are often asymptomatic, but around 10% of people may complain of tracheo-esophageal symptoms, almost always as dysphagia, termed dysphagia lusoria 3.Instead of being the first branch (with the right common carotid as the brachiocephalic artery), it arises on its own as the fourth branch, distal to the left subclavian artery.
It then hooks back to reach the right side with its relationship to the esophagus variable:80% posterior to the esophagus15% between esophagus and trachea5% anterior to the tracheaas can be expected from the embryological development of the artery, the right recurrent laryngeal nerve is usually non-recurrent (that is, enters the larynx directly)aneurysmal dilatation (aberrant subclavian arterial aneurysms) of the proximal portion of an aberrant right subclavian artery can occur, a pouch-like aneurysmal dilatation is called a diverticulum of Kommerellif there is a retro-esophageal courseit can get compressed between the esophagus and the vertebrathe incidence of stenosis/occlusion in this segment is higherit can be associated with trisomy 21 5, trisomy 18 and other chromosomal defectsit can get compressed between the esophagus and the vertebrathe incidence of stenosis/occlusion in this segment is higherAn upper GI contrast study will demonstrate displacement of the contrast-filled esophagus.
This displacement by the aberrant vessels produces the so-called bayonet deformity of aberrant right subclavian artery.
CT and MRI both demonstrate the aberrant branch arising from the distal left aortic arch and coursing rightwards, and can define the relationship between the aberrant artery and the trachea and esophagus.

Aberrations in the Normal Development and Involution of the breast (ANDI) is an all-encompassing term that is used to describe a wide spectrum of the benign breast diseases.
As the name suggests, it is based on the theory that most of the encountered benign breast disorders are essentially minor aberrations in the normal development process, hormonal response and involution of the breast.polymastia and polytheliaaccessory axillary breast tissuecongenital nipple retractionmacromastiafibroadenomaphyllodes tumoradolescent hypertrophymastalgia nodularityfibrocystic change:cystsfibrosissclerosing adenosisperiductal mastitiscystsfibrosissclerosing adenosis

Abnormal bowel wall attenuation patterns on CT scan can be grouped under five categories:The first three patterns are seen on contrast studies.
It is defined as uniform enhancement of thickened bowel wall which is greater than or equal to the venous opacification.
Common differentials include:inflammatory bowel diseasevascular disorderIt is defined as homogeneous enhancement of thickened bowel wall that equals to the muscle enhancement.
It is useful in differentiating benign from malignant diseases.
It corresponds to edema in the submucosa (cf.
fat halo sign where there is fat infiltrating the submucosa).
It may be seen in three forms:outer hyperattenuating layer with inner edematous layerinner hyperattenuating layer with outer edematous layeredematous submucosa between two hyperattenuating layers (target sign)Common differentials include:inflammatory bowel diseasevascular disorderinfectious diseasesradiation damageIt represents infiltration of the submucosa with fat, between the muscularis and the mucosa.
It is suggestive of inflammatory bowel disease, but may be seen in normal adults.
It is synonymous with pneumatosis and the causes include:traumaischemiainfection

A mnemonic used for abnormal collection of barium anywhere in the body:FEDUPF: fistulaE: extravasationD: diverticulumU: ulcerP: perforation

Abnormal ductus venosus waveforms can arise in a number of conditions ranging from aneuploidy to vascular malformations and fetal tumors. "
A wave" reversal can be seen in 5% of euploid fetuses 9.PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAbnormal waveforms in fetal ductus venosus flow assessment can occur in a number of situations:aneuploidic anomaliesDown syndrome: around 80% are thought to have abnormal waveformscongenital cardiac anomaliesfetal pulmonary arterial anomaliescongenital pulmonary stenosispulmonary atresiafetal arteriovenous malformations leading to shuntingvein of Galen malformationfetal tumors that lead to arteriovenous shuntingsacrococcygeal teratomaepignathustwin-to-twin transfusion syndrome: recipient twinmaternal diabetes: may exhibit increased PI values 7Down syndrome: around 80% are thought to have abnormal waveformsfetal pulmonary arterial anomaliescongenital pulmonary stenosispulmonary atresiacongenital pulmonary stenosispulmonary atresiavein of Galen malformationsacrococcygeal teratomaepignathusAbnormal waveforms include:absent flow in ductus venosus A wavereversal of flow in ductus venosus A waveabnormal indices:abnormal pulsatility index (PI)abnormal S wave to A wave ratio (S:A)abnormal peak velocity indexabnormal pulsatility index (PI)abnormal S wave to A wave ratio (S:A)abnormal peak velocity indexGrowth restricted fetuses with abnormal ductus venosus flow have worse perinatal outcomes compared to those where the flow abnormality is confined to the umbilical or middle cerebral artery 8.

Abnormal renal rotation (renal malrotation) refers to an anatomical variation in the position of the kidneys, in particular to anomalous orientation of the renal hilum.
It may occur unilaterally or bilaterally.
It is almost always an asymptomatic incidental finding.
EpidemiologyGross anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresMalrotation is rare, perhaps under reported, and in one autopsy series, a prevalence of ~1 in 2000 was reported 1.
It is more common in males.
The renal hilum is normally directed anteromedially.
The renal hilum is initially oriented anteriorly, but during its ascent from the pelvis the kidney rotates 90° along its longitudinal axis to its more typical orientation.
Anomalies in this process can result in 1,2:incomplete rotation or nonrotation (most common): hilum faces anteriorly, ureters are located laterallyexcessive rotation (hyper-rotation): hilum faces posteriorly; renal vessels are located posteriorlyreversed rotation: hilum faces laterally, renal vessels are located anteriorly, ureter is located laterallySagittal rotation, i.e. kidney rotation around its hilum in the sagittal plane, is another type of rotation, which as yet does not have an embryological explanation.
It is asymptomatic and is virtually always discovered incidentally on imaging 5.malrotation can be demonstrated when the calyces project medially to the renal pelvison CT urography, the renal pelvis of a nonrotated kidney will project anteriorly 3The exact cause of malrotation of the kidneys is unclear, though it has been hypothesized that malrotation may occur if the ureteric bud inserts into an abnormal region of metanephric mesenchyme.
Its association with renal ectopia suggests that the process of ascent and rotation are related.abnormal renal rotation may cause partial ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) obstruction, which can result in increased incidence of urolithiasis and infectionthe malrotated kidney is prone to stasis, increasing the risk of urolithiasis

The OMERACT ultrasound group published a consensus in 2005 of widely accepted definitions of abnormal ultrasound findings in rheumatological diseases:erosion: an intra-articular discontinuity of the bone surface that is visible in two orthogonal planesjoint effusion: abnormal hypoechoic or an anechoic (relative to subdermal fat, but sometimes isoechoic or hyperechoic) intra-articular material that is displaceable and compressible, but does not exhibit Doppler signalsynovitis: abnormal hypoechoic (relative to subdermal fat, but sometimes isoechoic or hyperechoic) intra-articular tissue that is non displaceable, poorly compressible, and may exhibit Doppler signaltenosynovitis: abnormal anechoic and/or hypoechoic (relative to tendon fibers) tendon sheath widening or distention, which can be related to the presence of both abnormal tenosynovial fluid and/or synovial hypertrophyenthesitis: entheseal thickening, hypoechogenicity, and the presence of Doppler signal as a marker of active inflammation

Abnormal intra-abdominal gas is an important radiologic finding with many potential causes.
It may be seen on a chest radiograph, abdominal radiograph, CT or MRI.pneumoperitoneumretropneumoperitoneumpseudopneumoperitoneumabnormally located bowel, e.g. Chilaiditi syndrome (bowel interposed between liver and hemidiaphragm), inguinal herniaintramural gasabscess gaspneumobiliaportal venous gasemphysematous cholecystitisemphysematous cystitisabnormally located bowel, e.g. Chilaiditi syndrome (bowel interposed between liver and hemidiaphragm), inguinal herniaintramural gasabscess gaspneumobiliaportal venous gasemphysematous cholecystitisemphysematous cystitis

An eccentrically-located gestational sac towards the fundus of the uterus is the normal sonographic appearance; however an abnormally eccentric gestational sac on ultrasound may be apparent due to a number of causesThey includeinterstitial ectopic pregnancy 1normally implanted pregnancy in a bicornuate uterusunicornuate uterusdisplacement by a uterine leiomyoma or other myometrial massa focal myometrial contraction at the time of scanningfar lateral intrauterine pregnancybicornuate uterusunicornuate uterus

An abnormally low sac position can result from several possibilities which includeimpending/ongoing miscarriagecervical ectopic pregnancyCesarean scar ectopic pregnancy  fundal fibroid or other mass compressing the sac downward

Abnormally thickened endometrium on imaging may occur for a number of reasons which may be categorized based on whether or not they are related to pregnancy.
Etiologies may also be classified based on whether the patient is premenopausal or postmenopausal.
Differential diagnosisPractical pointsSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresearly pregnancy: prior to sac being visualized (<5 weeks of gestation)ectopic pregnancy: thickened endometrium and sometimes fluid collection or pseudogestational sac can be associatedretained products of conceptionheterogeneously thickened endometrium, with increased vascularitymay be fluid collection(s)findings are usually associated with an enlarged uterusintrauterine blood clot: heterogeneous endometrium with no vascularitymolar pregnancy: thickened with multiple small cystic spacesrecent gestational state (delivery)endometritisheterogeneously thickened endometrium, with increased vascularitymay be fluid collection(s)findings are usually associated with an enlarged uterusendometritisendometrial carcinoma: variable appearanceendometrial hyperplasia: usually uniformly hyperechoic and tends to be diffuse.
Can be a differential diagnosis of many conditions i.e. PCOSendometrial polyp: usually hyperechoic, often focal, look for vascular stalkTamoxifen-related endometrial changes: variable appearanceshormone replacement therapy (HRT): in postmenopausal femaleendometritis: prominent hyperechoic endometrium +/- fluid and debrisadhesions: irregular echogenic areas with focal thickeningobstructed outletovarian tumors associated with endometrial thickeningendometrioid carcinoma of the ovarygranulosa cell ovarian cancerendometrioid carcinoma of the ovarygranulosa cell ovarian cancerendometrial thickness in the secretory phase (days 14-28) may normally be up to 12-16 mm (see: endometrial thickness)non-emergent ultrasounds are optimally evaluated at day 5-10 of the menstrual cycle to reduce the wide variation in endometrial thicknessthe thickest portion of the endometrium should be measuredif there is fluid in the uterine cavity, it should be excluded from the measurement, which would be the sum of the two sagittal plane thicknesses~10% of endometrial carcinoma occurs in premenopausal womennon-emergent ultrasounds are optimally evaluated at day 5-10 of the menstrual cycle to reduce the wide variation in endometrial thicknessendometrial thicknessabnormally thickened myometriumuterine enlargement

The ABR certifying exam is the second of two exams necessary for certification in diagnostic and interventional radiology in the United States of America (the first is the core exam).
It is taken 15 months after the end of the PGY 5 year (or three months after a one year PGY 6 fellowship).The exam is computer-based and is five hours long.
The exam has five modules:noninterpretive skills (NIS)essentials of diagnostic radiologythree clinical practice areasthese are selected by the candidate, and may be chosen fromgeneral radiologybreast radiologycardiac radiologygastrointestinal radiologygenitourinary radiologymusculoskeletal radiologyneuroradiologythoracic radiologypediatric radiologyultrasoundnuclear medicinevascular and interventional radiologythe three clinical practice areas may contain more than one of any module (e.g. a candidate could choose two thoracic modules and one neuroradiology module)... if more than one module of the same clinical practice area is chosen, the additional modules are more difficult these are selected by the candidate, and may be chosen fromgeneral radiologybreast radiologycardiac radiologygastrointestinal radiologygenitourinary radiologymusculoskeletal radiologyneuroradiologythoracic radiologypediatric radiologyultrasoundnuclear medicinevascular and interventional radiologythe three clinical practice areas may contain more than one of any module (e.g. a candidate could choose two thoracic modules and one neuroradiology module)... if more than one module of the same clinical practice area is chosen, the additional modules are more difficult general radiologybreast radiologycardiac radiologygastrointestinal radiologygenitourinary radiologymusculoskeletal radiologyneuroradiologythoracic radiologypediatric radiologyultrasoundnuclear medicinevascular and interventional radiologyThe first exam was administered in October 2015.
The exam was graded as pass or fail, without the "conditional" category in the core exam.
The exam is offered in both Chicago, Illinois and Tucson, Arizona.
This exam replaces the old ABR "written boards" and "oral boards", which were discontinued in 2013.

The ABR core exam is set by the American Board of Radiology, and is the first of two exams necessary for certification in diagnostic and interventional radiology in the United States of America.
It is taken at the end of PGY4 of radiology residency training.
The exam is computer-based and occurs in two sessions (7.5 hours and 6 hours) over two days.
The number of questions is not fixed, but is >600.The exam tests a wide range of radiology knowledge:physics (a large part of the exam)breast imagingcardiac imagingneuroradiologynuclear medicinemusculoskeletal imagingthoracic imaginggenitourinary imaginggastrointestinal imagingvascular imaginginterventional radiologyreproductive and endocrine imagingpediatric imagingradiography and fluoroscopyultrasoundCTMRIquality and safetyIf a candidate meets the passing standard when all categories are scored together, then the exam is passed.
If the candidate fails the physics category, then he or she will have "conditioned" the exam and must repeat the physics category.
The exam is offered in June and November.
It can be taken in either Chicago, Illinois or Tucson, Arizona.
This exam replaces the old ABR "written boards" and "oral boards", which were discontinued in 2013.

≤11 ribs is associated with a number of congenital abnormalities and skeletal dysplasias, including:Down syndrome (trisomy 21)campomelic dysplasiakyphomelic dysplasiasasphyxiating thoracic dysplasia (Jeune syndrome)short rib polydactyly syndromestrisomy 18chromosome 1q21.1 deletion syndrome​atelosteogenesisspondylocostal dysostosisspondylometaphyseal dysplasia, Sedaghatian typeRitscher-Schinzel syndromeHowever, it is important to note that up to 8% individuals have been found to have 11 pairs of ribs, as an anatomic variant, without any apparent deleterious clinical sequelae 1.

An a-line is an ultrasonographic artifact appreciated during insonation of an aerated lung.
1The term may be applied to the horizontal, echogenic long path reverberation artifacts that occur beneath the pleural line at multiples of the distance between the ultrasound probe and the visceral-parietal pleural interface which appear to fatigue as a function of depth.
The artifact is hypothesized to result from sound reflecting between two parallel, closely apposed reflective surfaces.
2

The biological/medical term agenesis (plural: ageneses) refers to failure of an organ to grow or develop during the embryological period.
Examples include:appendiceal agenesiscerebellar agenesiscorpus callosum agenesisdental agenesisdiaphragmatic agenesisdorsal pancreatic agenesisductus venosus agenesisgallbladder agenesislung agenesispericardial agenesisrenal agenesisthyroid agenesisurethral agenesisuterine agenesisvaginal agenesis

Agenesis of the appendix is extremely rare, with an incidence at surgery of approximately 1 in 100,000 laparotomies 1.
It is most commonly due to a sporadic etiology.
However in the rare genetic condition, familial apple peel jejunal atresia, absence of the appendix is a recognized feature.
Also thalidomide exposure in utero may lead to non-formation of the vermiform appendix.
The appendix in humans is regarded as a truly vestigial organ as despite much research, the absence of the appendix has not been shown to be associated with any deleterious health effects.
Moreover people without appendices avoid the risk of developing acute appendicitis.

Agenesis of the diaphragm is a congenital diaphragmatic developmental anomaly where all or part of diaphragm fails to form.
It can sometimes be thought of as an extreme form congenital diaphragmatic herniation 1.PathologyRadiographic featuresComplicationsReferencesThe agenesis can either be unilateral or bilateral.
Herniation of abdominal contents into thorax and pulmonary hypoplasia occurs which leads to a fatal cardiopulmonary failure in the early few hours of life.
Less than 10 cases of adult presentation have been reported.aneuploidic syndromictrisomy 22nonaneupliodic syndromicFryns syndrometrisomy 22Fryns syndromeVarious modalities have a role in the diagnosis of diaphragmatic agenesis.
Patients who can be diagnosed based on x-ray, most often present with obstructive symptoms due to intrathoracic abdominal contents.
The diagnosis could be aided with a contrast study to confirm the intrathoracic location of bowel loops.
Multiplanar CT images or MRI can provide a definitive diagnosis.development of pulmonary hypoplasia in utero

Agenesis of the left hepatic lobe is a rare variation in liver anatomy.
It is clinically asymptomatic and discovered during imaging or surgery.absence of the left hepatic lobe (left of the falciform ligament, Couinaud segments II and III)absence of left hepatic artery, left portal vein, and left hepatic biliary systempossible presence of a few remnant buds/nodules of tissue adjacent to the falciform ligament 2possible compensatory hypertrophy of the right hepatic lobe and caudate lobeabsence of left hepatic artery, left portal vein, and left hepatic biliary systemhepatectomy (look for postsurgical change)severe atrophy of the left hepatic lobe: left lobe structures will still be present

Agenesis of the right hepatic lobe is a rare variation in liver anatomy.absence of the right hepatic lobeabsence of right hepatic artery, right portal vein, and right hepatic biliary systemcompensatory hypertrophy of the left hepatic lobe and caudate lobepossible retrohepatic gallbladderabsence of right hepatic artery, right portal vein, and right hepatic biliary systemhepatectomy (look for postsurgical change)severe hypoplasia/atrophy of the right hepatic lobe: right lobe structures will still be present

Agger nasi air cells are the most anterior ethmoidal air cells lying anterolateral and inferior to the frontal recess and anterior and above the attachment of the middle turbinate.
They are located within the lacrimal bone and therefore have as lateral relations the orbit, the lacrimal sac and the nasolacrimal duct.
They are identified in 90% of patients, and should not be confused with Haller cells (located along the medial floor of the orbit) or supraorbital air cells (located in the orbital roof).They may contribute to chronic frontal sinusitis 3.From the Latin "agger nasi", literally meaning nasal mound.
concha bullosa: aerated middle turbinateOnodi cells: sphenoethmoidal cellsHaller cells: infraorbital ethmoidal air cellspneumatized dorsum sella

Aggressive angiomyxomas are rare tumors that arise in the pelvis and typically cross the levator ani muscles.
Despite its name, it is essentially a benign tumor and the term "aggressive" is given due to a predilection for local recurrence.
Only rarely does it metastasize.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresReferencesCases and figuresIt is seen predominantly in women (>90%) in the second through fourth decades of life 3.Aggressive angiomyxoma is a mesenchymal tumor that arises from connective tissue.
Classically shows involvement of both pelvic and perineal compartments.
On CT, a well-defined mass with attenuation less than or equal to that of adjacent skeletal muscle is typically seen, often with swirled enhancing tissue internally 3.Reported signal characteristics of the lesion include:T1: tends to be iso to low signal T2: predominantly high signal and typically gives a swirling appearance

Aggressive fibromatosis is a type of musculoskeletal fibromatosis.
While it is a non-metastasizing fibrous lesion, it is thought to be a true neoplasm that arises from the fascial and musculoaponeurotic coverings, sometimes at the site of a traumatic or post-surgical scar.
TerminologyEpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesThe term aggressive fibromatosis is occasionally used synonymously with desmoid tumors by some authors 5.
This article will focus in the musculoskeletal presentation of this tumor; for the abdominal presentation, please refer to the latter.
According to one the study, the mean age at presentation is ~40 7.
There may be a slight female predilection (male to female ratio of 1:1.2).Being non-encapsulated, poorly circumscribed, and infiltrative, aggressive fibromatosis grows insidiously and invades locally.
The lesions may become quite large and adhere to neighboring structures, such as neurovascular bundles.
The lesions grossly resemble scar tissue and are composed of well-differentiated fibroblasts embedded in an abundant collagenous matrix with increased cellularity at the periphery.
Cytologic features of malignancy are lacking.
Its exact cause is unknown.
Recognized associations include:surgical or accidental traumapregnancyoestrogenic hormone useGardner syndromefamilial adenomatous polyposisAggressive fibromatosis can occur in the superficial or deep soft tissues anywhere in the body.
However, the head and neck regions have been reported in 25% of cases, with the supraclavicular fossae and neck being the most common locations.
Desmoid-type fibromatosis is listed in the WHO classification of soft tissue tumors under the category "fibroblastic/myofibroblastic tumors.
"They tend to be poorly marginated infiltrating the surrounding tissues, the lack of metastasis can help distinguish aggressive fibromatosis from a fibrosarcoma.
Radiographs may show a soft-tissue mass, localized periosteal thickening, or direct bony destruction/invasion 4.Signal characteristics of the lesion include 7:T1: homogeneously isointense or mildly hyperintenseT2/STIR: high heterogeneous signalT1 C+ (Gd): typically enhances avidlyGE: peripheral areas of smooth low signal intensity that do not represent calcification (check radiographs) or hemorrhage (check gradient images/scouts for blooming) are characteristicMay show arterial stretching, neovascularity, and tumor staining 4.It does not have any propensity for metastasis although it can aggressively invade structures.
The optimal management for aggressive fibromatosis depends on tumor location and extent.
Surgical resection may be offered although the likelihood of local recurrence after surgery is high, particularly if margins are positive.
Moderate-dose radiotherapy alone for gross disease or after a microscopically incomplete resection yields local control rates of approximately 75-80% 3.
Treatment with pharmacologic agents results in objective response rates of approximately 40-50%.fibrosarcomaaggressive osseous tumorsaggressive schwannomaWHO 2002 classification of soft tissue tumors

Aggressive granulomatosis post hip replacement is a potential complication of a hip joint replacement.
Some authors use the same term for particle disease - if you are an expert on this we would love your help.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisHistory and etymologyReferencesCases and figuresAggressive granulomas consist of well organized connective tissue containing histiocytic-monocytic and fibroblastic reactive zones.
They can be highly vascularized, and villous structures can be observed.
On immunohistological evaluation, most of the cells in the aggressive granulomatous tissue tends to be multinucleated giant cells and C3bi-receptor and nonspecific esterase-positive monocyte-macrophages.
1There may be evidence of progressive lytic focal regions around the replacement.
There is usually smooth endosteal scalloping 7 and no sclerotic reaction.
The presence of a joint effusion due to reactive synovitis may be an early MR finding.
This may occur before symptoms arise.
There may also be capsular thickening and the presence of low signal intensity debris within the joint, though the normal fluid signal intensity of the effusion may also be seen.
In certain occasions, it may be mistaken for primary or secondary neoplasia.
The process is thought to have been first recognized by Sir John Charnley, British orthopedic surgeon, in the 1960s 8.

Aggressive vertebral hemangiomata are a rare form of vertebral hemangiomata where significant vertebral expansion, extra-osseous component with epidural extension, disturbance of blood flow, and occasionally compression fractures can be present causing spinal cord and/or nerve root compression 1,2.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresIt can occur at any age, with peak prevalence in young adults.
They represent approximately 1% of spinal hemangiomas and are usually symptomatic 1.
75% of these lesions occur in the thoracic spine between T3 and T9 vertebral segments 3.Unlike typical vertebral hemangiomas which are almost always asymptomatic, aggressive type 'always' present with neurological manifestations due to the mass effect of the epidural component upon the spinal cord, nerve roots or both, leading to compressive myelopathy and/or radiculopathy 2.They are composed of blood vessels with slow flowing, dilated venous channels surrounded by fat, infiltrating the medullary cavity 4.They appear as hypodense expansile vertebral masses, with cortical defects and soft tissue extension and spinal cord/nerve root compression.
The classic “polka dot” and “corduroy” signs of the vertebral body due to thickened vertebral trabeculae are also helpful 1.
They generally occupy the entire vertebral body, extend into the neural arch, expand the osseous margins, and contain a soft tissue component 1.Thickened trabeculae appear as low signal areas in both T1 and T2 images.
The extraosseous component typically follows usual hemangioma in all pulse sequences with high T1 and T2 signals as well as uniform post-contrast enhancement.
MRI is excellent at the assessment of cord or nerve root compression 1.Accurate preoperative diagnosis is essential because they are highly vascular with high tendency of intraoperative bleeding.
Surgery is required in cases of rapid or progressive neurological symptoms like compressive myelopathy or radiculopathy.
Endovascular embolization prior to surgery to minimize intraoperative blood loss.
Radiotherapy can be used in patients with slow progressive neurological deficits.
Minimally-invasive procedures may be successful in smaller lesions 5.metastases: usually have decreased signal intensity on T1 and increased signal intensity on T2lymphoma: epidural component appears hypointense on T1 and less hyperintense on T2

Aging blood on MRI is dependent on the varying MRI signal characteristics of hemorrhagic collections with time and can be very useful in correlating the imaging findings with the clinical picture.
However, as it can be complicated to recall the MRI features of aging blood through the five stages of hematoma evolution several mnemonics have been devised:I Be, IdDy, BiDy, BaBy, Doo DooI Bleed, I Die, Bleed Die, Bleed Bleed, Die DieI BID BaD BaBy DOI Bleed, I Die, But Department Boss Bleeds, Department DiesThe first two mnemonics use the first letters of the words and word pairs to denote the signal characteristics of blood at each stage as isointense (I), bright (B), or dark (D).
The first bold letter in each pair denotes the typical T1 signal finding, while the second denotes the T2 signal change.
T1 IsointenseT2 Brighthyperacute < 1dayT1 IsointenseT2 Darkacute 1 to 3 days​T1 BrightT2 Darkearly subacute 2 to 7 daysT1 BrightT2 Brightlate subacute 7 to 14-28 days​​T1 DarkT2 Darkchronic >14 to 28 daysFor those that find it difficult to memorize the mnemonic above an alternative is found below which uses full word pairs.​I Bleed T1 IsointenseT2 Brighthyperacute < 1 dayI Die T1 IsointenseT2 Darkacute 1 to 3 daysBleed Die ​T1 BrightT2 Darkearly subacute 2 to 7 daysBleed Bleed T1 BrightT2 Brightlate subacute 7 to 14-28 daysDie Die​​T1 DarkT2 Darkchronic >14 to 28 daysT1 IsointenseT2 Brighthyperacute < 1 dayT1 IsointenseT2 Darkacute 1 to 3 days​T1 BrightT2 Darkearly subacute 2 to 7 daysT1 BrightT2 Brightlate subacute 7 to 14-28 days​​T1 DarkT2 Darkchronic >14 to 28 daysThis mnemonic uses bold capital letters of the sentence in pairs of two to denote the signal characteristics of blood at each stage as isointense (I), bright (B), or dark (D).
The first bold letter in each pair denotes the typical T1 signal finding while the second denotes the T2 signal change.
I BT1 IsointenseT2 Brighthyperacute < 1 dayI D T1 IsointenseT2 Darkacute 1 to 3 daysBaD ​T1 BrightT2 Darkearly subacute 2 to 7 daysBaByT1 BrightT2 Brightlate subacute 7 to 14-28 daysDO​​T1 DarkT2 dark (O represents the hemosiderin ring)chronic >14 to 28 daysT1 IsointenseT2 Brighthyperacute < 1 dayT1 IsointenseT2 Darkacute 1 to 3 days​T1 BrightT2 Darkearly subacute 2 to 7 daysT1 BrightT2 Brightlate subacute 7 to 14-28 days​​T1 DarkT2 dark (O represents the hemosiderin ring)chronic >14 to 28 daysaging blood on MRI

Agnosia is a neurological disorder characterized by an inability to identify an object despite both having knowledge of that object and functional sensory input.
For example, a patient with posterior cortical atrophy who characteristically have visual agnosia, will be unable to identify a hammer, even though they are able to see it and are able to describe its function.
Gerstmann syndrome

Agraphia represents acquired impairments of writing ability secondary to damage or dysfunction of the central nervous system.
Impairments caused solely by motor dysfunction (e.g. hand paresis or tremor) are not considered to be forms of agraphia 1.Agraphia is rarely an isolated entity, and commonly manifests itself together with other language or visuospatial defects, apraxia, or dementia.
In the characteristic Gerstmann syndrome agraphia co-occurs with acalculia, left-right disorientation, and finger agnosia.
The etiology of agraphia is diverse with stroke, traumatic CNS injury, or dementia (Alzheimer disease) being the most common culprits.
Agraphia may result from focal damage to the left dorsolateral frontal lobe, but also from left temporal and parietal injuries.
In less severe cases agraphia may manifest as e.g. an increased frequency of spelling errors in writing, whilst in severe forms even single letter writing may become impossible.
Interestingly, number writing ability is often relatively preserved, as is writing the own name of the patient 1.
Major forms of agraphia:pure agraphia: isolated agraphia, without other dysfunctions, such as dementia, visuospatial impairment, or aphasia 2spatial agraphia (e.g. inability to maintain a horizontal writing direction, incorrect grouping and fragmentation of words) 3micrographia: progressively decreasing size of letters in a sentenceoften associated with parkinsonism and Alzheimer disease 1dysexecutive agraphia: diminished ability to express thoughts in writingcommonly associated with prefrontal and frontal pathology 4often associated with parkinsonism and Alzheimer disease 1commonly associated with prefrontal and frontal pathology 4

AICA-PICA dominance refers to the principle that the cerebellar vascular territory supplied by the anterior inferior cerebellar artery and posterior inferior cerebellar artery have a reciprocal arrangement.
That is the size of the AICA and the subsequent territory it supplies is inversely proportional to that of the PICA, and vice versa.

This classification was proposed by Ahlback et al.
in 1968.According to Ahlbäck system, knee joint osteoarthritis is classified as:grade 1: joint space narrowing (less than 3 mm)grade 2: joint space obliterationgrade 3: minor bone attrition (0-5 mm)grade 4: moderate bone attrition (5-10 mm)grade 5: severe bone attrition (more than 10 mm) Kellgren and Lawrence classification systems

Aicardi-Goutières syndrome is a rare hereditary neurodegenerative disease which usually presents in early infancy with systemic and central nervous system inflammatory syndrome characterized by hepatosplenomegaly, vasculopathy and encephalopathy.
Many of the features are similar to congenital TORCH infections.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosesRelated articlesReferencesEvidence suggests that familial systemic lupus erythematosus and microcephaly-intracranial calcification syndrome (MICS) - also known as pseudo-TORCH syndrome or Baraitser-Reardon syndrome are in fact phenotypic variants of Aicardi-Goutières syndrome 1.
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome is rare and usually inherited in an autosomal recessive pattern (see pathology below).
Penetrance is variable as is the age of clinical onset; most within the first year of life (3 - 7 months is typical) although delayed onset in later childhood is reported 2.
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome has variable penetrance with some individuals being only mildly affected.
The majority, however, present with both physical and intellectual disabilities in infancy after a period of apparently normal development (often only lasting a few weeks).
Presentation may be with 1,2: neurologicaldevelopmental delay and regressionirritabilityocular and myoclonic jerksseizures (25%)small head sizeintermittent pyrexiashepatosplenomegalyabnormal liver enzymesthrombocytopeniachilblain of the fingers/toes and earsdevelopmental delay and regressionirritabilityocular and myoclonic jerksseizures (25%)During the active phase of the disease, elevation of interferon-α levels and a lymphocytosis can be detected in the CSF 1,2.
Aicardi-Goutières syndrome is the result of a number of genetic mutations.
These usually, but not invariably, demonstrate autosomal recessive inheritance 1.
Multiple genes have been identified including: autosomal recessive or dominant: ADAR, TREX1 (common)autosomal recessive: RNASEH2A, RNASEH2B (most common), RNASEH2C, SAMHD1autosomal dominant: IFIH1The exact pathogenesis has not been fully understood.
However, it appears to be the result of impaired metabolism/clearance of cellular nucleic acid debris.
Accumulation eventually triggers an immune response with ensuing damage to various tissues similar to that seen in antenatal infections (e.g. TORCH) and autoimmune diseases (e.g. systemic lupus erythematosus) 2.
Calcification of basal ganglia, thalamus and paraventricular white matter 1.
The morphology of the calcification varies greatly from large 'chunks' of dense calcification to tiny punctate specks 1,2.
High T2 signal in the white matter, especially in the frontal and temporal lobes surrounding the ventricular horns 1.
Temporal lobe cysts-like spaces may also form 1.
Over time, atrophy develops, particularly of the periventricular regions 1.
The brainstem and cerebellum may also develop prominent atrophy 1.
Arteriopathy is also a prominent feature of SAMHD1 mutations with aneurysms, stenoses and moyamoya pattern encountered 1.
Although no established treatment exists, there is evidence that immune modulation (e.g. corticosteroids) during the active phase of the disease may be of benefit 1.
Although not established beyond doubt, it appears that Aicardi-Goutières syndrome represents a monophasic encephalopathy in infancy without ongoing progression.
Death is therefore believed to be the consequence of neurological damage that occurred during the active phase of the disease rather than representing true disease progression.
Named after the French pediatric neurologists Jean Aicardi (1926-2015) 3 and Francoise Goutières (fl.
2019) who described the first case in 1984.
Although many other leukodystrophies are viable differential diagnoses, additional conditions to be considered include 1:antenatal/perinatal infections (e.g. TORCH infections)band-like calcification polymicrogyria (BLC-PMG; pseudo-TORCH syndrome) classic Cockayne syndrome (CS type 1)cerebroretinal microangiopathy with calcifications and cysts (CRMCC; Coats plus)Hoyeraal Hreidarsson syndromemitochondrial cytopathies (e.g. Leigh syndrome)

Aicardi syndrome is a rare severe developmental disorder.
It results from an X-linked genetic defect that is fatal in males and therefore only manifests in females (except for rare 47, XXY cases).Note: Aicardi syndrome is distinct from Aicardi-Goutieres syndrome although both are named after Jean Aicardi (see below).
Clinical presentationPathologyHistory and etymologyReferencesCases and figuresThe typical presentation in infancy is with a triad of:infantile spasms: salaam seizures with typical bowing of the headcorpus callosal dysgenesis: most consistent featuredistinctive chorioretinal lacunae: pathognomonicCharacteristic malformations affect the brain, spine and eyes and include:brainagenesis of the corpus callosumcolpocephalygrey matter heterotopiaasymmetry of cerebral hemispheresposterior fossa abnormalities (95%), including Dandy-Walker continuum:posterior fossa cystcerebellar hypoplasiatectal enlargementchoroid plexus papillomachoroid plexus carcinomapolymicrogyria (predominantly frontal and perisylvian)intracranial cysts (diameters range between 1.0-5.0 cm)midline interhemispheric: 81%intraventricular: 29%parenchymal: 10%extra-axial: 8%ocularmicrophthalmiacolobomachorioretinopathychorioretinal lacunaeeyelid twitchingabsent pupillary reflexesfunnel-shaped disksspinescoliosisspina bifidabutterfly or block vertebraehemivertebraeabnormal costovertebral articulationagenesis of the corpus callosumcolpocephalygrey matter heterotopiaasymmetry of cerebral hemispheresposterior fossa abnormalities (95%), including Dandy-Walker continuum:posterior fossa cystcerebellar hypoplasiatectal enlargementchoroid plexus papillomachoroid plexus carcinomapolymicrogyria (predominantly frontal and perisylvian)intracranial cysts (diameters range between 1.0-5.0 cm)midline interhemispheric: 81%intraventricular: 29%parenchymal: 10%extra-axial: 8%posterior fossa cystcerebellar hypoplasiatectal enlargementmidline interhemispheric: 81%intraventricular: 29%parenchymal: 10%extra-axial: 8%microphthalmiacolobomachorioretinopathychorioretinal lacunaeeyelid twitchingabsent pupillary reflexesfunnel-shaped diskschorioretinal lacunaescoliosisspina bifidabutterfly or block vertebraehemivertebraeabnormal costovertebral articulationFirst described in 1961 by Jean Francois Marie Aicardi (1926-2015), a French neuropaediatrician 2.

AIDS cholangiopathy refers to an acalculous, secondary opportunistic cholangitis that occurs in AIDS patients as a result of immunosuppression.
Characterized by multiple irregular strictures essentially indistinguishable from primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC).
There are four pathological patterns: a combination of sclerosing cholangitis and papillary stenosis (50%)isolated intrahepatic sclerosing cholangitis–like appearance (20%)isolated papillary stenosis (15%)long-segment extrahepatic duct stricture +/- concurrent intrahepatic disease (15%)No definite organism is identified in up to half of the patients.
It typically affects patients with low CD4 counts (<135/mm3).
Postulated causative organisms include:cytomegalovirus (CMV)herpes simplex virus (HSV)Cryptosporidium parvumMicrosporidiumMycobacterium avium complexchemotherapy-induced cholangitisprimary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC)eosinophilic cholangitis

Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) embryopathy is characterized by a group of dysmorphic features, which manifests either before or after birth in offsprings of women who are infected by HIV virus.
The diagnosis, however, is in disfavour according to some authors 2.Transplacental infection occurs generally in early gestation.
The rate of maternal to fetal viral transmission varies from 14% in Europe to 45% in Africa.
Of all children infected with HIV virus, approximately 99% were infected from their mothers.
Sonographic features are broad and include:signs of fetal infection may be presentevidence of fetal demiseintrauterine growth restrictionmicrocephalycraniofacial abnormalities, present in 50-75% of cases, can give characteristic facial appearances and include:prominent, square or box-like foreheadlateral bossinghypertelorismflat nasal bridge and short noseprominent, square or box-like foreheadlateral bossinghypertelorismflat nasal bridge and short nose

AIDS-defining illnesses are conditions that in the setting of a HIV infection confirm the diagnosis of AIDS, and do not commonly occur in immunocompetent individuals 2.
According to the CDC surveillance case definition 1, they are:bacterial infections: multiple or recurrentcandidiasis: of esophagus, bronchi, trachea, or lungscoccidioidomycosis: disseminated or extrapulmonarycryptococcosis: extrapulmonarycryptosporidiosis or isosporiasis: chronic intestinal cytomegalovirus disease: other than liver, spleen, or nodescytomegalovirus retinitis: with loss of visionherpes simplex: chronic ulcers, bronchitis, pneumonitis, or esophagitishistoplasmosis: disseminated or extrapulmonaryMycobacterium tuberculosis, Mycobacterium avium complex or other species: disseminated or extrapulmonaryPneumocystis pneumoniapneumonia: recurrentprogressive multifocal leukoencephalopathySalmonella septicemia: recurrentcerebral toxoplasmosiscervical cancer: invasiveKaposi sarcomalymphoma: Burkitt, immunoblastic or primary CNSencephalopathy: HIV relatedlymphoid interstitial pneumonia (LIP) or pulmonary lymphoid hyperplasia complexwasting syndrome of HIV

AIDS-related pulmonary lymphoma (ARPL) is classified as a distinct form of pulmonary lymphoma.
Pulmonary involvement is a common extranodal site in AIDS-related NHL.PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesARPL is typically a high-grade B-cell non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and the majority of patients have advanced HIV infection, with a mean CD4 count of around 67/mm3 3.According to some publications, the diagnostic criteria for pulmonary involvement requires 2:positive HIV statushistologically proven lymphomatous pulmonary involvementabsence of mediastinal and/or hilar adenopathy on chest radiographyabsence of extrathoracic lymphoma extensionFeatures can be variable and can include:multiple peripheral well-defined nodules of varying sizesusually, measure around 1-5 cm in diameterreflect dense focal monomorphic cellular infiltratesconsidered the commonest manifestation 1,4centrilobular nodulessubpleural parenchymal infiltrative changesperibronchovascular reticular infiltrative changes 4peripheral mass-like regions (may have associated cavitation).interlobular septal thickeningusually, measure around 1-5 cm in diameterreflect dense focal monomorphic cellular infiltratesconsidered the commonest manifestation 1,4pulmonary manifestations of HIV/AIDS

AIDS-related diffuse large B-cell lymphomas are one of the immunodeficiency-associated CNS lymphomas, and in western countries represented a dramatic increase in primary CNS lymphoma during the HIV/AIDS epidemic of the 1980s, although the incidence is likely lower in patients treated with HAART 1.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesLike other immunodeficiency-associated CNS lymphomas, AIDS-related lymphomas tend to be EBV-related 1.
Imaging is similar to other immunodeficiency-associated CNS lymphomas, with tumors more likely to be necrotic, heterogeneous and multifocal 1.
A particularly challenging differential diagnosis is cerebral toxoplasmosis.
See cerebral toxoplasmosis vs primary CNS lymphoma.

Ainhum, also known as dactylolysis spontanea, is a rare cutaneous condition in which a hyperkeratotic band partially or totally encircles a digit.
The constriction thins the underlying bone, which is then prone to fracture.
Some cases result in autoamputation.
EpidemiologyRadiologic featuresHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresSome have suggested that the disease is much more prevalent in those with melanotic skin (e.g. Africans) 2.marked soft tissue constriction around a digitpossible underlying fracture or autoamputationThe word "ainhum" is thought to derive from the naga dialect in Burma, meaning "to saw" or "to cut".
"Pseudoainhum" can occur in other disorders, includingleprosyamniotic bandspsoriasispalmoplantar keratodermapachonychia congenitaVohwinkel disease

Air bronchogram refers to the phenomenon of air-filled bronchi (dark) being made visible by the opacification of surrounding alveoli (grey/white).
It is almost always caused by a pathologic airspace/alveolar process, in which something other than air fills the alveoli.
Air bronchograms will not be visible if the bronchi themselves are opacified (e.g. by fluid) and thus indicate patent proximal airways.
Air bronchograms can be seen with several processes:pulmonary consolidation pulmonary edema: especially with alveolar edema 3non-obstructive atelectasissevere interstitial lung disease neoplasms: bronchioloalveolar carcinoma; pulmonary lymphomapulmonary infarctpulmonary hemorrhagenormal expirationAir bronchograms that persist for weeks despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy should raise the suspicion of a neoplastic process.
CT may be planned in such cases.
Sonographic air bronchograms arise as a secondary consequence of an extreme perturbation of the air-fluid relationship in lung parenchyma, in which fluid-filled alveoli act as an excellent acoustic medium and allow visualization of the lung parenchyma.
Arborising tubular structures representing the bronchial tree may be visualized which, when patent, appear to contain punctiform-to-linear foci.
These structures may remain fixed in position throughout the respiratory cycle or be observed to propagate distally and proximally with inspriation and expiration, respectively.
This distinction is important for determining the etiology of the underlying pathology 4;dynamic air bronchograms move centrifugally with respirationrepresent fluid mixed with air inside larger bronchi, which are in continuity with the gas inspired by the patientindicates a non-retractile consolidation, ruling out resorption atelectasisspecificity of 94% and a positive predictive value of 97% for pneumonia as the cause of the consolidationstatic air bronchograms lack detectable movement indicate isolated, trapped air, consistent with resorptive atelectasisrepresent fluid mixed with air inside larger bronchi, which are in continuity with the gas inspired by the patientindicates a non-retractile consolidation, ruling out resorption atelectasisspecificity of 94% and a positive predictive value of 97% for pneumonia as the cause of the consolidationindicate isolated, trapped air, consistent with resorptive atelectasisairspace disease

The air bubble artifact on CT is due to the presence of abnormal gas in the oil coolant which surrounds the x-ray tube.
The artifact manifests as subtle low density, which has only been described on brain scans.
The x-ray tube in a CT scanner is prevented from overheating by a heat exchange system which uses oil as its coolant.
The abnormal bubbles of air/gas in the system subtly modify the transmission of the primary x-ray beam, decreasing its attenuation by up to 3 HU.
The number and precise location of the bubbles may vary over time - due to their movement in the coolant - so that fluctuating attenuation of the x-rays occurs as coolant circulates and the tube rotates.
Therefore the position and severity of the artifact also varies.
As the effect on the attenuation of the x-ray beam is very mild this artifact has only been seen when narrow window widths are used, which for practical purposes is solely CT brain studies, primarily on "stroke" window settings.
Gas/air bubbles can arise within the coolant oil via several different mechanisms 3:during CT service/repair, e.g. oil changes/top-upsloss of integrity of the tube envelope/heat exchanger: it is designed to be a self-contained unit with no communication with the external environmentspontaneous formation of gas within the oil when in situ, due to vaporization in the system, increasingly common as the tube agesIt can be difficult for radiologists/radiographers to realize that this artifact is present, as true subtle low density on CT brain is often seen in early ischemia and other pathologies.
Radiologists or clinical referrers may become suspicious when consistent subtle findings on CT are not visible on repeat CT or MRI.A study from 2017 found that all scans with confirmed artifact had a characteristic stripe-like pattern of hypodensities, passing in an anteroposterior orientation, on the sagittal reformatted images.
This stripe is not seen when the low densities of ischemia are reviewed on the reformatted sagittal dataset.
If there is suspicion that the artifact might be present then the vendor needs to be contacted for testing of the scanner by qualified personnel.
A service engineer is able to perform a 'gas detection test' to determine how many gas bubbles are in the coolant.
Newer scanners are now available which are able to give a readout of the number of gas bubbles in the oil coolant, and can alert the scanner vendor if the quantity of gas reaches a predetermined critical threshold.
Resolving the artifact requires an engineer to replace the oil and treat any underlying defect in the system e.g. a leak in the tube housing.
This artifact was first detected in 2015, and described in 2016 by two separate groups (one in Scotland, the other in the US) in two different case-series, each seemingly unaware of the other 1,2.
It has now been reported by multiple centers.
It remains unknown why this artifact was not reported previously, even allowing for its subtle nature.

The air bubble sign is seen in CT of complicated (ruptured or infected) pulmonary hydatid cyst and refers to small bubbles of gas within the periphery of pulmonary mass and is helpful, particularly in endemic areas, in suggesting the diagnosis over other masses (e.g. metastases or primary lung tumors) 1,2.
It is thought to represent air tracking between the pericyst and the hydatid cyst membrane 1.
It should not be confused with the similarly named sign of tension pneumocephalus: see air bubble sign (tension pneumocephalus).

The air bubble sign is seen on CT of the brain and represents multiple small foci of air within the subarachnoid space, especially the Sylvian fissure.1Although described as a sign of tension pneumocephalus it is also seen in pneumocephalus without elevated pressures.2It should not be confused with the similarly named sign of complicated pulmonary hydatid disease: see air bubble sign (pulmonary hydatid).

An air crescent sign describes the crescent of air that can be seen in invasive aspergillosis, semi-invasive aspergillosis or other processes that cause pulmonary necrosis.
It usually heralds recovery and is the result of increased granulocyte activity.
It should not be confused with the Monod sign 2 which describes the air that surrounds an aspergilloma.
Unfortunately, the air around the fungal ball is also crescent-shaped and the term air crescent sign is often used interchangeably in that instance - opinion as to the validity of this latter use is controversial.
Causes include 5:aspergilloma - often described as the Monod signangioinvasive aspergillosishydatid cystother rare causespulmonary tuberculosisRasmussen aneurysm in a tuberculous cavitypulmonary abscesslung cancerpulmonary hematomaPneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP)pulmonary tuberculosisRasmussen aneurysm in a tuberculous cavitypulmonary abscesslung cancerpulmonary hematomaPneumocystis jirovecii pneumonia (PJP)In angioinvasive fungal infection, the nodules are composed of infected hemorrhagic and infarcted lung tissue.
As the neutrophil count recovers and the patient mounts an immune response, peripheral reabsorption of necrotic tissue causes the retraction of the infarcted center and air fills the space in between 7.
This creates an air crescent within the nodules and is a good prognostic finding because it marks the recovery phase of the infection.
This sign is seen in ~50% of patients 2.

The utilization of the air gap technique in general radiography is limited due to the need for equipment facilitation to create the air gap when it is not inherent in the standard technique.
There are many different methods of performing the horizontal beam lateral hip projection depending on the patient’s ability to move and the equipment available.
Many methods have an air gap present due to the position of the patient and image detector.
Due to the thickness of the proximal anatomy, an anti-scatter grid may also be necessary for optimal scatter reduction.
Recent research found that the optimum dose and image quality scenario for the projection phantom study involves using both an anti-scatter grid and a 45 cm air gap 1.
For pelvic radiography, an air gap of 10 cm proved adequate for diagnosis in both the CR and DR systems.
The use of the 10 cm air gap technique is found to be sufficient to replace a 10:1 ratio anti-scatter grid, and replacing a grid with an air gap in a DR system could result in a dose reduction of 69.6 to 79.4% 2.The standard positioning of the imaged patient, image receptor, and x-ray tube for a lateral cervical spine image includes an inherent air gap created by the distance between the patient's neck and the image receptor which is against their shoulder.
Using an anti-scatter grid despite the inherent air gap can result in a dose increase factor of an average 2.21 when compared to only using the air gap as an anti-scatter method 3.The use of an anti-scatter grid and filter combination for the lateral cervical spine projection can improve the visualization of C7-T1 vertebral junction.
It was found that within the scenarios examined, 49.8% of the images produced were adequate to visualize C7-T1, while 61.1% of the images produced using a grid and filter combination were adequate 4.
The increased adequacy with grid and filter use may justify the use of an anti-scatter grid due to the decreased need for further imaging to define the C7-T1 level.
The decision to use either an air gap alone or a grid and air gap combination for scatter reduction should be made on an equipment and patient basis.

The air gap technique is utilized for the magnification mammography view.
Magnification mammography is a high dose imaging technique which is generally utilized as a follow-up to a standard mammogram image series when a focal area needs to be more clearly examined 1.
The air gap technique is utilized in magnification mammography to aid in the visualization of microcalcifications that may not be clearly distinguished otherwise.
The addition of an air gap between the imaged breast tissue and the image receptor effectively reduces the focal area imaged, and therefore increases the magnification and spatial resolution.
The magnification and spatial resolution increase allows small lesions and microcalcifications to be well visualized 2.Anti-scatter grids are generally not used due to the air gap being utilized as both a magnification and scatter reduction tool.
The presence of the grid would increase the radiation dose even further.

The air gap technique is a radiographic technique that improves image contrast resolution through reducing the amount of scattered radiation that reaches the image detector.
In select situations, this technique can be used instead of an antiscatter grid as the primary scatter reduction method in order to reduce patient dose 1.
The air gap technique is utilized in both plain radiography and mammography.
The reduction in scattered radiation reaching the detector is achieved through increasing the distance between the effective scatter point source and the image receptor 1.
This increased distance allows for more chance that the scatter radiations path will result in it not reaching the receptor and therefore not reduce image contrast 2.The air gap technique is not as effective in high kVp settings because the scattered x-rays are aimed in more forward direction.
In projections where the kVp selected is below 90, the scattered x-rays are generally directed more to the side and therefore the air gap technique is more effective in removing them 2.The decision to use an air gap for scatter radiation control should be considered when an air gap is inherent in the projection positioning and in situations where scatter radiation must be reduced and the equipment allows for an increased object-image distance.
For situations where the air gap technique is chosen for scatter reduction and the object-image distance is not predetermined by projection and equipment requirements, an air gap of 10 to 15 cm has shown to be effective 2.To maintain a constant radiation exposure to the image receptor, the exposure factor must be increased in order to compensate for the x-rays that no longer reach the receptor due to the larger object to image distance 1.The increase in exposure factors needed is comparable to that of an 8:1 ratio grid.
The use of an air gap in place of a high ratio anti-scatter grid for scatter reduction therefore results in a lower radiation dose requirement 2.If the object-image distance is increased without increasing the source image distance, the patient would be positioned much closer to the x-ray source, which would result in the radiation dose being increased in accordance with the inverse square law.
Increasing the source-image distance will prevent this 2.The increased object-to-image distance will also result in increased magnification factor which can be calculated using the following formula 1: magnification factor = source-image-distance/source-object distanceTo image the same amount of anatomy as a non-air gap image, a larger image receptor may need to be utilized.
To maintain spatial resolution and image sharpness, the source-image distance may need to be increased, though this may not always be possible with equipment limitations 3.

An air space nodule is a small (few millimeters to 1 cm), ill-defined, nodular opacity that is often centrilobular in location and is non-specific, seen in many conditions.
Commonly it represents a focal area of consolidation or peribronchiolar inflammation, and can indicate endobronchial spread of disease.

Air space disease, or alveolar lung disease, is a process in which there is a filling of the lung's alveoli / acini.lobar or segmental distributionpoorly marginatedairspace nodulestendency to coalesceair bronchogramsbat's wing (butterfly) distributionrapidly changing over time

Air space opacification is a descriptive term that refers to filling of the pulmonary tree with material that attenuates x-rays more than the surrounding lung parenchyma.
It is one of the many patterns of lung opacification and is equivalent to the pathological diagnosis of pulmonary consolidation.
In radiological studies, it presents as increased attenuation of the lung parenchyma causing obscuration of pulmonary vessels, without significant loss of volume, in the segment(s) affected.
Air bronchograms can also be found 1, 2.The opacification is caused by fluid or solid material within the airways that causes a difference in the relative attenuation of the lung:transudate, e.g. pulmonary edema secondary to heart failurepus, e.g. bacterial pneumoniablood, e.g. pulmonary hemorrhagecells, e.g. bronchoalveolar carcinomaprotein, e.g. alveolar proteinosisfat, e.g. lipoid pneumoniagastric contents, e.g. aspiration pneumoniawater, e.g. drowningWhen considering the likely causes of airspace opacification, it is useful to determine chronicity (by reviewing previous radiographs) and considering laterality.
Additionally, the presence of mediastinal or hilar lymphadenopathy further refines the massive list of differentials:acute unilateral air space opacificationacute bilateral air space opacificationacute airspace opacification with lymphadenopathychronic unilateral airspace opacificationchronic bilateral airspace opacificationOn chest radiography a number of patterns are recognized:lobar consolidationright upper lobe consolidationright middle lobe consolidationright lower lobe consolidationleft upper lobe consolidationleft lower lobe consolidationbronchopneumonialobar lung collapseright upper lobe collapseright middle lobe collapseright lower lobe collapseleft upper lobe collapseleft lower lobe collapseright upper lobe consolidationright middle lobe consolidationright lower lobe consolidationleft upper lobe consolidationleft lower lobe consolidationright upper lobe collapseright middle lobe collapseright lower lobe collapseleft upper lobe collapseleft lower lobe collapse

The differential for air space opacities is extensive, and needs to be interpreted in context of chronicity (previous imaging) and clinical context.
It is therefore useful to divide airspace opacities as follows:acute airspace opacities with lymph node enlargementacute airspace opacities: unilateralacute airspace opacities: bilateralchronic airspace opacities: unilateralchronic airspace opacities: bilateral

Air trapping in chest imaging refers to retention of excess gas (“air”) in all or part of the lung, especially during expiration, either as a result of complete or partial airway obstruction or as a result of local abnormalities in pulmonary compliance.
It may also sometimes be observed in normal individuals 3.TerminologyPathologyRadiographic featuresReferencesCases and figuresAlthough not in common usage, the term gas trapping is more accurate.
The presence of air trapping can arise from a number of causes (the mnemonic HSBC can be used to help remember these) but usually suggests airway disease (often small airways disease).
Air trapping can occur in isolation, or in association with bronchiectasis, interstitial lung disease, or rarely tree-in-bud opacity, which can help narrow the etiology 3,6:in isolationasthmabronchiolitis obliteranschronic bronchitiswith bronchiectasisnon-tuberculous mycobacterial infectioncystic fibrosisidiopathic bronchiectasiswith interstitial lung diseasesarcoidosishypersensitivity pneumonitisasthmabronchiolitis obliteranschronic bronchitisnon-tuberculous mycobacterial infectioncystic fibrosisidiopathic bronchiectasissarcoidosishypersensitivity pneumonitisOther uncommon conditions include 5,6: pulmonary tumourlets: neuroendocrine cell proliferation spectrumdiffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia (DIPNECH) 7  scoliosis: especially when severevasculitidesgranulomatosis with polyangiitis 10eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 10neuroendocrine cell proliferation spectrumdiffuse idiopathic pulmonary neuroendocrine cell hyperplasia (DIPNECH) 7  granulomatosis with polyangiitis 10eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis 10Air trapping is a descriptor used in lung CT seen as a decreased attenuation of pulmonary parenchyma, especially manifested as a less than normal increase in attenuation during expiratory acquisition.
This appearance must be differentiated from the decreased attenuation of hypoperfusion secondary to locally increased pulmonary arterial resistance 1.The concurrent presence of absence or bronchiectasis and interstitial lung disease may be useful to narrow the differential possibilities 10.

Air-bronchograms are gas-filled bronchi surrounded by alveoli filled with fluid, pus or other material 1.
It is a very useful sign because it is highly sensitive and specific for the presence of lung consolidation rather than collapse.
Reference articleSummaryRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThis is a summary article; read more in our article on air bronchogram.pathophysiologygas-filled bronchus surrounded by abnormal lungpus/fluid/cells/blood within the alveolar spacescollapse adjacent to the bronchusrole of imagingdetermine the cause of adjacent opacificationair-space opacification (consolidation)atelectasis (collapse) tends not to have air bronchogramspleural fluid does not have air bronchogramsdetermine whether there are any associated complicationsunderlying causeidentify pleural effusionidentify cavitationgas-filled bronchus surrounded by abnormal lungpus/fluid/cells/blood within the alveolar spacescollapse adjacent to the bronchuspus/fluid/cells/blood within the alveolar spacescollapse adjacent to the bronchusdetermine the cause of adjacent opacificationair-space opacification (consolidation)atelectasis (collapse) tends not to have air bronchogramspleural fluid does not have air bronchogramsdetermine whether there are any associated complicationsunderlying causeidentify pleural effusionidentify cavitationair-space opacification (consolidation)atelectasis (collapse) tends not to have air bronchogramspleural fluid does not have air bronchogramsunderlying causeidentify pleural effusionidentify cavitationA bronchus filled with gas does not attenuate x-rays as they pass through the thorax.
As such, they appear black (or at least very dark) on radiograph or CT.
In a normal lung the bronchi are surrounded by alveoli that are also filled with gas, and therefore are virtually indistinguishable.
However, when there is fluid material in the surrounding alveoli, this abnormal accumulation attenuates x-rays and so the lung appears dense or white.
This is what we call air-space opacification.
The bronchi running through this area are now clearly seen as gas-filled tubes coursing through a solid-appearing area of the lung.
Air-bronchograms are more commonly seen in consolidation than collapse although their presence does not exclude collapse.
Computer tomography uses x-rays to build up a multislice picture of a section of anatomy.
As such, the imaging findings are similar to a radiograph - we just see them in much more detail.

Air-space opacification is a descriptive term that refers to filling of the lung parenchyma with material that attenuates x-rays more than the unaffected surrounding lung tissue.
It is the radiological correlate of the pathological diagnosis of pulmonary consolidation.
Reference articleSummaryRadiographic featuresRelated articlesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; read more in our article on air-space opacification.anatomyalveolibronchilungpathophysiologymaterial fills the lung parenchymafluid: pulmonary edema pus: pneumoniablood: pulmonary hemorrhagecells: cancerprotein: alveolar proteinosis (rare)distributionpatchyair-space filling is incomplete and non-contiguousresidual gas within the alveolilobarcomplete filling of a lobe of the lungclear delineation between consolidation and adjacent gas-filled structuresthe remainder of the lung or in bronchi traveling through the lobeno margin between consolidation and other soft-tissue density structuresmediastinum or diaphragmmultifocalsymmetrical or asymmetricalperihilar or peripheraloften non-specific without clinical history and examination findingsrole of imagingconfirm air-space opacification and differentiate from atelectasis or pleural effusion where possiblehelp to determine the cause, e.g. other signs of heart failureidentify complications, e.g. abscess formationdemonstrate accompanying pathology, e.g. effusion or empyemadetermine severity and extent, e.g. number of lobes involved, uni- or bilateralitycommon pathologypneumoniapulmonary edemalung canceralveolibronchilungmaterial fills the lung parenchymafluid: pulmonary edema pus: pneumoniablood: pulmonary hemorrhagecells: cancerprotein: alveolar proteinosis (rare)distributionpatchyair-space filling is incomplete and non-contiguousresidual gas within the alveolilobarcomplete filling of a lobe of the lungclear delineation between consolidation and adjacent gas-filled structuresthe remainder of the lung or in bronchi traveling through the lobeno margin between consolidation and other soft-tissue density structuresmediastinum or diaphragmmultifocalsymmetrical or asymmetricalperihilar or peripheraloften non-specific without clinical history and examination findingsfluid: pulmonary edema pus: pneumoniablood: pulmonary hemorrhagecells: cancerprotein: alveolar proteinosis (rare)patchyair-space filling is incomplete and non-contiguousresidual gas within the alveolilobarcomplete filling of a lobe of the lungclear delineation between consolidation and adjacent gas-filled structuresthe remainder of the lung or in bronchi traveling through the lobeno margin between consolidation and other soft-tissue density structuresmediastinum or diaphragmmultifocalsymmetrical or asymmetricalperihilar or peripheraloften non-specific without clinical history and examination findingsair-space filling is incomplete and non-contiguousresidual gas within the alveolicomplete filling of a lobe of the lungclear delineation between consolidation and adjacent gas-filled structuresthe remainder of the lung or in bronchi traveling through the lobeno margin between consolidation and other soft-tissue density structuresmediastinum or diaphragmthe remainder of the lung or in bronchi traveling through the lobemediastinum or diaphragmsymmetrical or asymmetricalperihilar or peripheraloften non-specific without clinical history and examination findingsconfirm air-space opacification and differentiate from atelectasis or pleural effusion where possiblehelp to determine the cause, e.g. other signs of heart failureidentify complications, e.g. abscess formationdemonstrate accompanying pathology, e.g. effusion or empyemadetermine severity and extent, e.g. number of lobes involved, uni- or bilateralitypneumoniapulmonary edemalung cancernormal air-filled lung is blackair-space opacification is radiopaque (white)aerated bronchiair-space opacification looks very similar to the chest x-raydistribution can be assessed more accuratelyassessment of complications is more accuratedistribution can be assessed more accuratelyassessment of complications is more accurate

Airspace nodules are irregularly marginated nodular opacities with air bronchograms that tend to measure 8 mm in diameter.
They are quite separate from pulmonary nodules that range in size, are homogeneous and well-defined (being surrounded by normal lung).

Airway centered interstitial fibrosis is a rare subtype of pulmonary fibrosis with variable outcomes.
It is characterized by fibrosis of the respiratory bronchioles and the peribronchiolar interstitium.
It may be triggered by exogenous agents or endogenous autoimmune conditions such as rheumatoid arthritis.
Some of the exogenously triggered precipitants include:hypersensitivity pneumonitisgastro-esophageal reflux diseaseIt is thought to have better survival when compared with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.

Airway foreign bodies in children are potentially fatal, which is why immediate recognition is important.
Unfortunately, delayed diagnosis is common.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisChildren under the age of four years are at increased risk of foreign body (FB) aspiration, with a slight male predominance 1.
Most children (~70%) are witnessed to have had a choking event at the time of aspiration.
Children may otherwise present with cough, dyspnea, or irritability 2,6.Most (70-90%) foreign bodies are organic, most commonly seeds and nuts.
Inorganic foreign bodies vary dramatically and can include teeth, coins, pins, pens/crayons, etc.
Aspirated foreign bodies have a predilection for the right tracheobronchial tree, given the wider and steeper structure of the right main bronchus 6.
The hallmark of an aspirated foreign body is a lung volume that does not change during the respiratory cycle 6.
Medical imaging departments will have a dedicated suspected foreign body inhalation series.the patient should be radiographed on expiration: this will exaggerate the differences between the lungsin infants and toddlers, a parent can be asked to push inward and upward on the child's upper abdomen for attaining expirationthe normal lung should appear smaller and denser than the affected lungdue to the check valve mechanism, where air enters the bronchus around the foreign body but cannot exit, the affected lung will usually appear overinflated and hyperlucent, with concomitant rib flaring and a depressed ipsilateral hemidiaphragminterrupted bronchus signthe chest x-ray will be normal in ~35% (range 30-40%) of patients 1-2the majority of foreign bodies are radiolucent 6unilateral emphysema or atelectasis are the most common findings; only uncommonly will a radiopaque foreign body be demonstrated 1-2in infants and toddlers, a parent can be asked to push inward and upward on the child's upper abdomen for attaining expirationthe normal lung should appear smaller and denser than the affected lungIn case there is a high suspicion of foreign body aspiration by an infant or toddler, but the chest x-ray is inconclusive, fluoroscopy may be attempted.
The child is imaged in the lateral decubitus position, lying on the presumed affected side.
The occluded lung is immobile on inspiration-respiration.
Can be useful in the assessment of a missed or retained foreign body after initial bronchoscopy 3.Bronchoscopy is considered the gold standard in the diagnosis of tracheobronchial tree foreign bodies 3, with the added benefit of being able to potentially retrieve the foreign body.pneumonia or atelectasisbronchitisbronchospasmpneumothoraxbroncho-esophageal fistulabronchiectasisesophageal foreign bodyflat foreign bodies (e.g. coins) tend to lie in the coronal plane in the esophagus 4lung hyperinflation 6asthma - usually bilateralviral infection - usually bilateralmass causing bronchial compression e.g. bronchogenic cyst, lymphadenopathypulmonary slingSwyer James syndrome flat foreign bodies (e.g. coins) tend to lie in the coronal plane in the esophagus 4asthma - usually bilateralviral infection - usually bilateralmass causing bronchial compression e.g. bronchogenic cyst, lymphadenopathypulmonary slingSwyer James syndrome

Airway invasive aspergillosis refers to a form of invasive aspergillosis that affects the airways as the major or only feature.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesIt usually occurs in immunocompromised neutropenic patients, particularly AIDS patients.
Aspergillosis affecting the airways as the major or only feature of the invasive disease is uncommon and is thought to occur in only around 7% of cases of intrathoracic aspergillosis 3.Clinical manifestations can vary and range from an acute tracheobronchitis, to bronchiolitis to bronchopneumonia.
It is histologically characterized by the presence of Aspergillus organisms deep to the airway basement membrane 1.
Two morphological forms of invasive aspergillosis of the trachea and bronchi have been described 3 :intraluminal: circumferential and superficial “pseudomembrane” of necrotic tissue, fibrin and hyphae, which may result in airway occlusionmultiple nodular plaques: invades adjacent tissues and may lead to broncho-esophageal and fatal hemorrhage from bronchoarterial fistulationThe imaging spectrum is variable, depending on whether is it an obstructive tracheobronchitis, bronchiolitis or bronchopneumonia:obstructive tracheobronchitis due to aspergillosismost have normal radiographic findings in the acute phaseoccasionally, tracheal or bronchial wall thickening may be seenaspergillus bronchiolitis usually seen as centrilobular nodules and branching linear or nodular areas of increased attenuation having a “tree-in-bud” appearance the centrilobular nodules have a patchy distribution in the lungaspergillus bronchopneumoniatypically seen as predominantly peribronchial areas of consolidationrarely, there can be lobar consolidationit is almost impossible to differentiate aspergillus bronchopneumonia from bronchopneumonia due to other causesmost have normal radiographic findings in the acute phaseoccasionally, tracheal or bronchial wall thickening may be seenusually seen as centrilobular nodules and branching linear or nodular areas of increased attenuation having a “tree-in-bud” appearance the centrilobular nodules have a patchy distribution in the lungtypically seen as predominantly peribronchial areas of consolidationrarely, there can be lobar consolidationit is almost impossible to differentiate aspergillus bronchopneumonia from bronchopneumonia due to other causes

Airway pressure release ventilation (APRV) is an alternative mode for mechanical ventilation.
It can be adopted as a method of alternative method for difficult-to-oxygenate patients with acute lung injury / acute respiratory distress syndrome (ALI/ARDS).Its is usually not recommended in patients who require deep sedation for management of their underlying disease (e.g., cerebral edema, status epilepticus etc).It was described initially by MC Stock and JB Downs in 1987 1.

Alagille syndrome (AGS) is a congenital genetic multi-system disorder.
Clinical presentationPathologyHistory and etymologyReferencesCases and figuresInfants typically present with symptoms relating to the liver where it is one of the most common causes of hereditary cholestasis.
Alagille syndrome is inherited in an autosomal fashion with a mutation of the JAG1 (90%) and NOTCH2 (1-2%) genes, located in the short arm of chromosome 20.
Microdeletion of 20p12 is seen in ~7.5% of patients 6.The spectrum of disease in Alagille syndrome is diverse:hepaticpaucity +/- stenoses of intrahepatic bile ducts that can eventually lead to liver cirrhosis and hepatic failure 4renalvariable, including cystic kidney disease, small kidneys, echogenic kidneys and nephrocalcinosis 5ocularposterior embryotoxonskeletalbutterfly type vertebrae (~50%)facialtriangular facialcardiovascularcoarctation of the aorta 1 (rare)peripheral pulmonary artery stenosispaucity +/- stenoses of intrahepatic bile ducts that can eventually lead to liver cirrhosis and hepatic failure 4variable, including cystic kidney disease, small kidneys, echogenic kidneys and nephrocalcinosis 5posterior embryotoxonbutterfly type vertebrae (~50%)triangular facialcoarctation of the aorta 1 (rare)peripheral pulmonary artery stenosisNamed after Daniel Alagille, the French pediatrician (1925-2005) who first described it.

Alanine is one of the compounds examined in MR spectroscopy.
It resonates at 1.48 ppm chemical shift.
It is elevated in meningiomas.

The alar fascia is a thin fibroareolar membrane separating the (anterior) true retropharyngeal space from the (posterior) danger space.
It is the ventral component of the deep layer of the deep cervical fascia.
Notably, in the well patient, the alar fascia is not usually visible on cross-sectional imaging, and the two spaces are typically identified as a single space.
The alar fascia may however become apparent on contrast-enhanced CT or MRI as a thin membrane in the retropharyngeal space in patients presenting with extensive regional edema or a collection.
SummaryGross anatomyRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferenceslocation: between the visceral and prevertebral fascia, dividing radiological retropharyngeal space in a coronal planeboundaries:superior: level of C1, where it may fuse posteriorly with the prevertebral fascia 1 or transition to loose areolar tissue 2inferior: level of T2, where it fuses anteriorly with visceral fascialateral: carotid sheaths bilaterallysuperior: level of C1, where it may fuse posteriorly with the prevertebral fascia 1 or transition to loose areolar tissue 2inferior: level of T2, where it fuses anteriorly with visceral fascialateral: carotid sheaths bilaterallySuperiorly, the prevertebral fascia extends until the level just above the C1 anterior tubercle, where it either fuses with prevertebral fascia posteriorly1, or narrowed to a median raphe before transitioning to loose areolar tissue 2.
It does not connect to the skull base as a distinct layer.
Inferiorly, there is progressive fusion anteriorly with the visceral (buccopharyngeal) fascia between the T2 and T4 vertebral levels.
Laterally, the alar fascia fuses with the lateral wall of each carotid sheath.
Additionally, some fibers are contributed by the medial raphe extensions of the posterior middle pharyngeal constrictor 2.
Although the alar fascia has a well defined attachment in the midline at the level of C1, it does not attach to the skull base laterally, which is a potential point of entry into the danger space posteriorly 4.Anteriorly, the alar fascia delimits the posterior margin of the true retropharyngeal space.
Posteriorly, the alar fascia delimits the anterior margin of the danger space.
The alar fascia is made of loose areolar tissue.
Some authors state that, in addition, the substance of the alar fascia contains the sympathetic chain, superior cervical ganglion, and superior laryngeal nerve 3.Alar fascia is not usually resolved on imaging; however, it may be visible on contrast-enhanced CT as a thin membrane in the retropharyngeal space in patients with extensive regional edema e.g. post-radiation therapy 2.retropharyngeal abscessalar fascia represents the anterior boundary of the danger space, itself a potential space through which an infective process from the pharyngeal region can extend into the mediastinumalar fascia represents the anterior boundary of the danger space, itself a potential space through which an infective process from the pharyngeal region can extend into the mediastinum

Alban Köhler (1874-1947) was a German radiologist best known for both his work in describing avascular necrosis of the navicular (now known as Köhler disease) and the publication of ‘Roentgenology - The Borderlands of the Normal and Early Pathological in the Skiagram’ a textbook exploring anatomical variations and anomalies.
Early lifeDevelopment of BorderlandsLater lifeRelated articlesReferencesAlban Köhler was born on the 1st March, 1874 in Pesta, Thuringia to a primarily agriculturally-focused family.
Rather than pursue a career in farming, Köhler undertook his medical studies in Berlin and Freiburg concluding in 1899.
By 1902 he was a confirmed radiologist following three years of surgical training at St. Joseph's hospital, Wiesbaden.
He was one of the founding members of the German Roentgen society, subsequently becoming the Society's president in 1912.Köhler’s most notable work is his book titled 'Roentgenology - The Borderlands of the Normal and Early Pathological in the Skiagram'.
First published in 1910, ‘Borderlands’ explored anatomical variations and anomalies using line drawings, a unique approach highly appreciated by all due to its ease of understanding.
Having undergone 13 revisions, this textbook is still in print today.
Despite multiple offers from universities and larger hospitals, Köhler was happier as a private practitioner, the notion that he was able to conduct such extraordinary work as a private practitioner is a homage to his passion for the profession.
Alban Köhler died on the 26th February 1947 in the city of Wiesbaden.
Rieder Gold Medal from the German Roentgen society for his work, ‘Roentgenology - The Borderlands of the Normal and Early Pathological in the Skiagram’'Roentgenology The Borderlands of the Normal and Early Pathological in the Skiagram' (still in print, albeit with an updated title)described a practice of using the teleroentgenogram to the orthodiagram to describe the heart developed a method to locate foreign bodies in the eye pioneered cinematography of the lungs, and aortic arches first described the childhood-onset osteonecrosis of the navicular bone in the foot now known as Köhler disease

The alar ligaments join the lateral margins of the sloping upper posterior margin of the dens of C2 to the lateral margins of the foramen magnum (adjacent to the occipital condyles) and lie on either side of the apical ligament.
They may be oblique or vertical and are thickest at the occipital attachment.
They are paired ligaments that are very strong and limit axial rotation and contralateral lateral flexion of the head.
In conjunction with the transverse band of the cruciform ligament, they are the primary stabilizers of the atlantoaxial joint 2.calcification of the alar ligaments

The alar thoracic artery is a rare variant arterial glandular branch of the axillary artery (usually the second part) that supplies the axillary fat, lymph nodes and skin of the axilla.

Alar ligament calcification​ is rare.
The alar ligaments arise bilaterally from the upper portion of the odontoid process and run obliquely cephalad and laterally to insert on the medial surface of the occipital condyles.
They stabilize the head during rotatory movements.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathology Radiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresFocal calcification of the alar ligament is very uncommon 1-5.Calcification of the alar ligament may be associated with neck and/or nuchal pain 1-4.Calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate (CPPD) and calcium hydroxyapatite (HAP) deposits are likely components of the calcification 2.CT scanning of C1/C2 is the best tool for the diagnosis of this condition 2.
Radiographs of the cervical spine can demonstrate a calcification in the periodontoid tip area 1.Calcifications of the alar ligaments are corticated structures located between the top sides of the odontoid process and the medial surface of the occipital condyles 1-5.
These calcifications may disappear with time 1.MR imaging is useful for defining the anatomic location of the alar ligament, also it may show a nodular fragment with low signal intensity in the alar ligament area 1.The treatment is usually conservative with anti-inflammatory therapy, neck immobilization, and bedrest 1,2,4.Ziza et al.
reported calcified deposits in ligaments of C1-C2 in 1982, but they did not specify which ligaments 2,4.
Bouvet in 1985, Yasukawa in 1990, and Yoshida in 1993 described cases with calcified deposits of the ligaments of the atlas and axis 4.
In 2001, Kobayashi et al.,
for the first time, reported two cases of focal calcification in the alar ligament 1,2,4,5.crowned dens syndrome: the calcifications are in a crown distribution around the top of the odontoid process and usually, affect the alar and transverse ligaments.
Unlike crowned dens syndrome, calcifications of the alar ligaments are focally located along the alar ligaments 1,3,5fractures of the craniovertebral junction: fractures of the odontoid process and occipital condyles are differential diagnoses from alar ligament calcification 1,3,5corticated and smooth surface of the calcified structure indicates that it represents alar ligament calcification rather than a fragment of bone 5fractures of the odontoid process and occipital condyles are differential diagnoses from alar ligament calcification 1,3,5corticated and smooth surface of the calcified structure indicates that it represents alar ligament calcification rather than a fragment of bone 5

Albert Salomon (1883-1976), a German surgeon, was the first physician to study x-rays of breast tissue.
Early lifeDevelopment of mammographyLater lifeRelated articlesReferencesImaging differential diagnosisTo be completed.
Salomon worked at the Royal Surgical University Clinic in Berlin and from about 1913 x-rayed 3000 breast specimens obtained from the morgue in an attempt to identify breast pathology.
He demonstrated tumor spread to axillary lymph nodes by using x-rays and was also the first person to associate microcalcifications with breast cancer.
Salomon published Beitrage zur pathologie und klinik der mammakarzinome (Contributions to the pathology and clinic of breast cancers) in 1913 1 describing that “Roentgen photographs of excised breast specimens give a demonstrable overview of the form and spread of cancerous tumors”.
Salomon postulated on his findings that there were different types of breast cancer.
After 1913, there was no new mammography literature published until Kleinschmidt wrote his article in 1927 2.Salomon worked as a physician with German forces in World War One.
He married his first wife Franziska Grunwald, a nursing sister and they had one child.
Grunwald committed suicide in the winter of 1925.
Salomon lost his appointment at the university hospital in 1933 after the Nazis came to power in Germany and Hitler was named German chancellor in January 1933.
After 1933 Salomon worked at the Jewish hospital in Berlin.
Salomon was interned in the Sachsenhausen concentration camp in 1938 after Kristallnacht on 9th and 10th November 1938.
After his release, the family left Germany.
Salomon was the father of the artist Charlotte Salomon (1917-1943) who became a victim of the Holocaust.
After the family left Germany she was sent to stay with her grandparents in the south of France.
Salomon and his second wife Paula (well-known opera singer Paula Lindberg) moved to Amsterdam.
In May 1940 Charlotte and her grandfather were sent to the concentration camp at Gurs by the Vichy government.
She died in Auschwitz aged 26.
Charlotte’s work survived the war and she has posthumously become a renowned artist.
Albert and Paula Saloman lived out the war by hiding in the Netherlands.
After the war, Salomon resumed working as a physician in Amsterdam.
A collection of writings is entitled 'Vortage und Artikel' (lectures and articles) 1950-1967, in which Salomon writes about a wide range of subjects, including religion and philosophy.

Albert Soiland (1873-1946), was a key figure in the establishment of radiology as an independent medical specialty in the United States.
He is most famously remembered for his crucial role in the founding of the American College of Radiology.
He was also a pioneering radiotherapist.
Early lifeRadiology pioneerFounder of the American College of RadiologyLater lifeLegacyRelated articlesReferencesAlbert Soiland was born on the 5th May 1873 in Stavanger, Norway and emigrated to the USA at the age of 10.
He enrolled in premedical studies at the University of Illinois in 1895, the same year he attained citizenship of the United States.
Roentgen’s discovery of x-rays was announced in Chicagoan newspapers in January 1896, when Soiland was a first year medical student.
He contracted tuberculosis at the end of his first year of study and was advised to move to sunnier climes to help his recovery.
He moved to the West Coast for medical school, graduating from the University of Southern California in 1900.
He helped construct the first x-ray facility at Les Angeles County Hospital in 1898, whilst still a medical student!
After graduating he was the first doctor in Southern California to specialize solely in radiology.
In 1902 he wrote an early paper on treating breast cancer with radiation.
In 1904 he was asked by the University of Southern California to set up their first department of radiology, becoming its first Professor of Radiology in the process.
In 1910 he set-up the Albert Soiland Radiological Clinic at 1407 South Hope Street in Les Angeles.
This later became the Albert Soiland Cancer Foundation, and is now part of the University of Southern California.
He was a founder of the Pacific Coast Roentgen Ray Society in 1915.
He was a co-founder of the Western Roentgen Ray Society, which was a forerunner to the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) 2.In 1923, a bill was passed by politicians in California allowing lay individuals to set-up and run x-ray centers.
This development greatly alarmed Soiland.
He felt that the time had come for radiology to be recognized as a bona fide medical specialty in the United States.
Thus, on the morning of June 26th 1923, he advanced a resolution at the House of Delegates of the American Medical Association (AMA) for radiology to be officially endorsed as a specialty and for a Section on Radiology to be established.
The AMA duly promulgated radiology as a specialty, although it took until 1924 for the Section to be set-up 2.On the evening of the same day, Soiland had dinner with twenty leading radiology colleagues.
He proposed that a College of Radiology be founded, something with which his radiology dinner companions concurred.
The American College of Radiology was incorporated in 1924 2.Although he started off as a general radiologist in later years he practised mainly radiation therapy.
He died from a myocardial infarction on 14th May 1946 2.Professor of Radiology, University of Southern California (1904)President of the Western Roentgen Ray Society (1919)President of the Radiological Society of North America (RSNA) (1922) 3President of the American Radium Society (1926)President of the American College of Radiology (1933)Gold Medal of the American College of Radiology (1933)establishment of radiology as a standalone specialty in the USfounder of the American College of Radiology

The Alberta stroke programme early CT score (ASPECTS) 1 is a 10-point quantitative topographic CT scan score used in patients with middle cerebral artery (MCA) stroke.
It has also been adapted for the posterior circulation (see below).
Scoring systemClinical usePosterior circulationRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresSegmental assessment of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) vascular territory is made and 1 point is deducted from the initial score of 10 for every region involved:caudateputameninternal capsuleinsular cortexM1: "anterior MCA cortex," corresponding to frontal operculumM2: "MCA cortex lateral to insular ribbon" corresponding to anterior temporal lobeM3: "posterior MCA cortex" corresponding to posterior temporal lobeM4: "anterior MCA territory immediately superior to M1"M5: "lateral MCA territory immediately superior to M2"M6: "posterior MCA territory immediately superior to M3"An ASPECTS score less than or equal to 7 predicts a worse functional outcome at 3 months as well as symptomatic hemorrhage.
According to the study performed by R I Aviv et al.,
patients with ASPECTS score less than 8 treated with thrombolysis did not have a good clinical outcome 3.Variations of the ASPECT scoring system have been described for use in the posterior circulation and referred to as pc-ASPECTS 5.
As is the case for the anterior circulation, the pc-ASPECTS is a 10 point scale, where points are lost for each region affected.
Unlike ASPECTS, the pons and the midbrain are worth 2 points each (regardless of whether or not the changes are bilateral; any involvement of the pons, for example, deducted 2 points).thalami (1 point each)occipital lobes (1 point each)midbrain (2 points)pons (2 points)cerebellar hemispheres (1 point each)

Alexander disease, also known as fibrinoid leukodystrophy, is a rare fatal leukodystrophy, which usually becomes clinically evident in the infantile period, although neonatal, juvenile and even adult variants are recognized.
As with many other diseases with variable age of presentation, the earlier it manifests the more fulminant the clinical course.
There are three clinical forms:Childhood-onset Alexander disease is sporadic and typically presents with macrocephaly, rapid neurological deterioration, seizures and spasticity, and retarded psychomotor development.
In some cases, the gene for glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) has been implicated.
Histologically the disease is characterized by the accumulation of large numbers of Rosenthal fibers and eosinophilic granular bodies.
It generally presents in infants and adolescents.
Macrocephaly is typically present, and other clinical features include progressive quadriparesis and intellectual failure.
Most of the cases are sporadic.
However, familial disease has also been reported.
A heterozygous mutation in the coding region, mapped to chromosome 17q21, of GFAP an astrocyte-specific intermediate filament protein, is associated with most cases of infantile sporadic onset.
Histologically the disease is characterized by the accumulation of large numbers of Rosenthal fibers and eosinophilic granular bodies (large accumulations agglomerations of astrocytic processes) in the degenerated (demyelinated) white matter which is a product of GFAP.
This is on its own a non-specific finding, as they are also seen in slow-growing or benign astrocytomas (e.g. pilocytic astrocytomas).
Intracellular deposition of Rosenthal fibers may cause abnormal functioning of the oligodendrocytes.
The disease begins in the frontal region and extends posteriorly.
Subcortical U-fibers are somewhat initially spared but affected relatively early in the course of the disease.
End-stage disease is characterized by contrast-enhancing cystic leukomalacia.
T2: increased signal inbifrontal white matter which tends to be symmetrical caudate head > globus pallidus > thalamus > brain stemperiventricular rimT1 C+ (Gd): enhancement may be seen in the same areasbifrontal white matter which tends to be symmetrical caudate head > globus pallidus > thalamus > brain stemperiventricular rimObstructive hydrocephalus secondary to periaqueductal involvement and swelling of basal ganglia may be seen.
Adult-onset Alexander disease (AOAD), which was only recognized with any frequency after GFAP was recognized as the mutation, has markedly different imaging findings and presentation.
It has been described as autosomally inherited in some pedigrees, presenting with prominent bulbar symptoms (dysphagia, dysphonia or dysarthria), sleep disturbance and impairment of autonomic function.
T2: increased T2 signal (demyelination) and atrophy of themedulla and upper cervical cordoccasional involvement of inferior cerebellar pedunclespons, middle and superior cerebellar peduncles (rare)supratentorial (typically periventricular) may be seen in patients <40 years of ageT1 C+ (Gd): patchy enhancement uncommonly seen in adult patientsmedulla and upper cervical cordoccasional involvement of inferior cerebellar pedunclespons, middle and superior cerebellar peduncles (rare)supratentorial (typically periventricular) may be seen in patients <40 years of age

Alexia (or acquired dyslexia) is a neurological term refers to an acquired impairment of reading resulting from damage of critical brain areas.
Alexia can manifest itself as an impairment of oral reading and reading comprehension alike and can occur in combination with various other disturbances of written or spoken language skills 1,2.
Major forms of alexia with language impairment:aphasic alexia: the patients demonstrate impaired oral reading, along with weakened expression, or understanding of spoken language (e.g. in Broca's and Wernicke's aphasia)alexia with agraphia: reading disturbances complicated by weakened writing skills, with preserved spoken language (e.g caused by injuries to the left angular gyrus)Forms of alexia without impaired language:pure (agnosic) alexia:patients cannot understand or read aloud written text, yet paradoxically they can express themselves in writing (are unable to read their own writing)pure alexia is most commonly caused by left occipital lobe injury and is therefore commonly associated with right-sided vision lossneglect alexia: patients suffering from unilateral neglect syndrome may ignore text written on the neglected side of a page, or substitute letters on the neglected side of individual words 1attentional alexia:relatively preserved single word reading, but an impaired reading of text as a wholeletters within individual words are also often incorrectly identified by the patients, whilst the word itself can be spelled correctly 2patients cannot understand or read aloud written text, yet paradoxically they can express themselves in writing (are unable to read their own writing)pure alexia is most commonly caused by left occipital lobe injury and is therefore commonly associated with right-sided vision lossrelatively preserved single word reading, but an impaired reading of text as a wholeletters within individual words are also often incorrectly identified by the patients, whilst the word itself can be spelled correctly 2

Aliasing artifact, otherwise known as undersampling, in CT refers to an error in the accuracy proponent of analog to digital converter (ADC) during image digitization.
Image digitization has three distinct steps: scanning, sampling, and quantization.
When sampling, the brightness of each pixel in the image is measured, and via a photomultiplier, creates an output analog signal that is then due to undergo quantization.
The more samples that are taken the more accurate the representation of the signal will be, hence if a lack of sampling has occurred the computer will process an inaccurate image resulting in an aliasing artifact.
The artifact has the appearance of Moiré patterns.

Aliasing in MRI, also known as wrap-around, is a frequently encountered MRI artifact that occurs when the field of view (FOV) is smaller than the body part being imaged.
The part of the body that lies beyond the edge of the FOV is projected onto the other side of the image.
This can be corrected, if necessary, by oversampling the data.
In the frequency direction, this is accomplished by sampling the signal twice as fast.
In the phase direction, the number of phase-encoding steps must be increased with a longer study as a result.
However, if the FOV and matrix size (phase-encoding steps) are increased and simultaneously number of excitations (or number of signal averages) reduced to half, the imaging time can be kept constant with correction of aliasing.
Case 1 demonstrates axial T2-weighted images of the brain that demonstrates aliasing.
The first image shows wrap-around with the back of the head projected over the front because the phase-encoded direction is anterior-posterior and the FOV is too small.
The second image has the phase and frequency directions reversed resulting in absence of the aliasing artifact.
Oversampling was used in the frequency direction to eliminate the aliasing.
More detailRemedySee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe basis of aliasing lies in "analog-to-digital conversion" wherein the continuous MR signal picked by the receiver coil is converted into its digital counterpart for presentation as a grey-scale image.
This ubiquitously involves sampling of the continuous signal at pre-defined intervals.
For greater fidelity in signal conversion, the sampling rate should be at least twice the highest frequency within the signal (Nyquist rate).
At lower sampling rates, high-frequency signals become indistinguishable from lower frequency signals, i.e., they become aliases.
In MRI, spatial localization within a single image depends on the frequency signature of the MR signal originating from that portion.
Within a given bandwidth, higher frequency signals come from the periphery of the image and are aliased over the lower frequency (relatively) central portion of the image.
Aliasing in MRI can occur in both phase and frequency axis.
Aliasing in MRI can be compensated for by:enlarging the field of view (FOV)using pre-saturation bands on areas outside the FOVanti-aliasing softwareswitching the phase and frequency directionsuse a surface coil to reduce the signal outside of the area of interestMRI artifactsaliasing in ultrasound

Aliasing is a phenomenon inherent to Doppler modalities which utilize intermittent sampling in which an insufficient sampling rate results in an inability to record direction and velocity accurately.
Unlike continuous wave Doppler, pulsed wave and color flow Doppler modalities alternate between rapid emission of ultrasound waves (at a rate termed the pulse repetition frequency) and reception of incident ultrasound waves.
The time an ultrasound wave travels, given a constant speed in soft tissue (c = 1540 meters/second) will correspond to the distance traveled.
Pulsed wave Doppler and color flow Doppler operate on this presumption; when a location of interest is designated, the ultrasound machine will only record returning echoes during an interval that corresponds to the time necessary for wave egress and return along a linear path.
If Doppler shifts occur at a frequency exceeding the maximum pulse interval (1/pulse repetition frequency) detected phase shifts will be calculated based on incorrect assumptions.
The Nyquist limit defines the frequency at which aliasing and range ambiguity will occur, and is equal to the PRF/2.
Factors such as higher velocities of target structures and increasing depth of the region of interest insonated will result in aliasing and consequent range ambiguity.
Other potential causative factors include:use of higher frequency transducersinappropriate angle of insonationlarge sampling volumeA specific use for aliasing in echocardiography is the calculation of the effective regurgitation orifice area in the assessment of valvular regurgitation, most commonly involving the mitral valve.
With color Doppler interrogation of a mitral regurgitant jet, a hemispheric flow convergence forms surface area tapering to form the vena contracta before entering the left atrium.
The hemispheric area (PISA) is calculated and the product of PISA and aliasing velocity yields regurgitant flow.
The quotient with calculated MR regurgitant VTI yields EROA.In case of spectral Doppler the velocity peak is cut off at the peak of the scale, and the peak is displayed at the bottom of the scale, often overlapping with the rest of the curve.
The artifact can be quickly remedied by lowering the baseline (if display of flow away from the transducer is not required), or increasing the PRF.In color Doppler aliasing is encountered as red to blue hues immediately adjacent to each other in a vessel, which is - unlike in case of true flow reversal - not separated by a black region of no flow.
The artifact immediately disappears if the upper margin of the velocity scale is increased above the peak flow velocity.
Color aliasing is useful for detecting foci of increased flow (e.g. stenosis, arteriovenous fistula).
Note that aliasing does not occur with power Doppler, as it does not display velocity 2.

All-access pass to online courses are available to institutions who can purchase access to all Radiopaedia.org online courses for a flat per-user fee.
You can purchase all-access passes from your verified institution's page or directly from the all-access pass page.
Find out more.

All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) syndrome, more recently known as differentiation syndrome (DS) 8, is a condition that can occur with patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia who are on therapeutic all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA).All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) is a normal constituent of plasma that is derived physiologically by intracellular oxidation of plasma retinol that has been absorbed from the intestines.
ATRA is also used as an accepted therapy for acute promyelocytic leukemia.
ATRA can differentiate acute promyelocytic leukemia blasts into mature granulocytes.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIt is characterized by fever, respiratory distress, pleural and pericardial effusion, weight gain, and pulmonary inﬁltrates noted on chest radiography.
Will depend on the system involved although many of the features are described in relation to the lungs.
Although the chest radiographic features are not specific, in the context of an appropriate clinical history, they may aid in early recognition of the ATRA syndrome.
Recognized chest radiographic features that can be part of the ATRA syndrome include: increased cardiothoracic ratioincreased vascular pedicle widthground-glass opacitiesperibronchial cufﬁngseptal linespleural effusion(s) In addition, chest radiography may show nodules and consolidation.
CT features may not be specific and the clinical context is extremely useful in image interpretation.
According to one study, the most consistent CT chest findings were small, irregular peripheral nodules in the lungs along with pleural effusions 5.Early intervention with high dose corticosteroids is thought to abort progression.
While most patients do well the occurrence of ATRA syndrome was associated with lower event-free survival.
It was first described in 1991 by Frankel et al.
1-3,7.leukemiapulmonary manifestations of leukemia

Alien limb syndrome is a rare neurological phenomenon in which a patient has the impression that their limb does not belong to them and is controlled by some external force 1.
It can occur in a number of neurodegenerative diseases, typically those with cortical involvement, including:corticobasal degeneration (most common 1)Alzheimer disease 2

Allan M Cormack (1924-1998) was a South African physicist who was instrumental in the development of the CT scanner.
Early lifeDevelopment of computed tomographyLater lifeLegacyRelated articlesReferencesAllan Macleod Cormack graduated in physics from Cape Town University in 1944 and was subsequently a doctoral student at Cambridge University where he worked with Otto Frisch.
He returned to South Africa and worked at the Groote Schuur Hospital on radiation absorption.
He published his important paper 'Representation of a function by its line integrals, with some radiological applications' in 1963 in the Journal of Applied Physics.
His interest in the theoretical aspects of x-ray technology while working at the Groote Schuur Hospital in Cape Town led to important theoretical publications in this new area and the subsequent sharing of the 1979 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, with Godfrey Hounsfield, for the development of CT.In 1957 he moved to Tufts University, USA as a Professor and became Chairman of the Physics department from 1968-1976.Although lesser known than Hounsfield, his pioneering work on axial tomography was a major contribution to the development of CT scanning.

Allelic heterogeneity is a genetics term referring to same gene mutations resulting in different phenotypes 1.
An example of a condition demonstrating allelic heterogeneity is Joubert syndrome and related disorders.

Allantoic cysts are a type of true cyst of the umbilical cord.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresThe allantois forms from the part of the fetal yolk sac that eventually becomes the primitive hindgut (the cloaca).
The cloaca divides into the hindgut posteriorly and the urogenital sinus anteriorly.
The allantois remains connected to the urogenital sinus and extends into the base of the umbilical cord.
The umbilical cord is formed from the fusion of the body stalk (containing the allantois) and the umbilical vessels and yolk stalk (containing the omphalomesenteric duct).
The allantois usually regresses by the 14th week of gestation, but may occasionally persist and present as a cystic mass in the base of the umbilical cord.vesico-allantoic cyst: communicates with the bladderMay be seen as an anechoic cystic mass of the umbilical cord which is centrally located in the cord with the umbilical vessels located against the outer wall.
It is typically located at the fetal end of the umbilical cord.omphalomesenteric duct cyst: located close to the periphery of the cordumbilical arterial aneurysm: shows color flow

Allen and Ferguson classification is used for research purposes to classify subaxial spine injuries.
It is based ofn the mechanism of injury and position of the neck during injury.
This classification was proposed by Allen and Ferguson in 19823 and at the time of writing (July 2016) remains the most widely used system for describing subaxial cervical spine injury.flexion and compressionvertical compressionflexion and distraction (facet joint dislocation)extension and compressionextension and distractionlateral flexion

Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) is at the mild end of the spectrum of disease caused by pulmonary aspergillosis and can be classified as an eosinophilic lung disease 2-4.EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThis entity is most commonly encountered in patients with longstanding asthma, and only occasionally in patients with cystic fibrosis 4,5.
Only rarely does it appear in patients with no other identifiable pulmonary illness 5.
In general, patients are young and are diagnosed before the age of 40 years 9.Clinically, patients have atopic symptoms (especially asthma) and present with recurrent chest infection.
They may expectorate orange-colored mucous plugs.
A clinical staging system has been developed 9:stage I: acutestage II: remissionstage III: recurrent exacerbationstage IV: steroid-dependent asthmastage V: pulmonary fibrosisMajor and minor criteria have also been established 5,6.major criteriaclinicalasthmaradiographic featurespulmonary opacities (transient or chronic)central bronchiectasisimmune systemblood eosinophiliaimmediate skin reactivity to Aspergillus antigen (elevated IgG and/or IgE against A.fumigatus)increased serum IgE (>1000 IU/ml)minor criteriafungal elements in sputumexpectoration of brown plugs/flecksdelayed skin reactivity to fungal antigensclinicalasthmaradiographic featurespulmonary opacities (transient or chronic)central bronchiectasisimmune systemblood eosinophiliaimmediate skin reactivity to Aspergillus antigen (elevated IgG and/or IgE against A.fumigatus)increased serum IgE (>1000 IU/ml)asthmapulmonary opacities (transient or chronic)central bronchiectasisblood eosinophiliaimmediate skin reactivity to Aspergillus antigen (elevated IgG and/or IgE against A.fumigatus)increased serum IgE (>1000 IU/ml)fungal elements in sputumexpectoration of brown plugs/flecksdelayed skin reactivity to fungal antigensASPER Criteria includes Asthma/atopy history, Serum IgG or IgE against Aspergillus,Proximal(central)bronchiectasis, IgE levels >1000ng/mL and reactive skin test.
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis is the result of hypersensitivity towards Aspergillus spp which grows within the lumen of the bronchi, without invasion.
The hypersensitivity initially causes bronchospasm and bronchial wall edema, which is IgE-mediated.
Ultimately, there is bronchial wall damage with loss of muscle and bronchial wall cartilage resulting in bronchiectasis (typically central bronchiectasis) 7.
Both type I and III allergic reactions have been implicated 4.Bronchocentric granulomatosis often occurs, which is characterized by necrotizing granulomatous inflammation that destroys the walls of small bronchi and bronchioles.
Macroscopically, the mucous plugs are orange / brown in color.
Segmental and subsegmental bronchi are dilated and filled with mucous, admixed with eosinophils and occasional fungal hyphae 4,7.
Charcot-Leyden crystals may be prominent 7.
Laboratory findings include:elevated Aspergillus-specific IgEelevated precipitating IgG against Aspergillusperipheral eosinophiliapositive skin testEarly in the disease chest x-rays will appear normal, or only demonstrate changes of asthma.
Transient patchy areas of consolidation may be evident representing eosinophilic pneumonia.
Eventually, bronchiectasis may be evident.
Mucoid impaction in dilated bronchi can appear mass-like or sausage shaped or branching opacities (finger in glove sign).
Pulmonary collapse may be seen as a consequence of endobronchial mucoid impaction.
Fleeting shadows over time can also be a characteristic feature of this disease 14.
These opacities usually appear and disappear in different areas of the lung over a period of time as transient pulmonary infiltrates.
CT findings include:fleeting pulmonary alveolar opacities: commoncentrilobular nodules representing dilated and opacified bronchioles 4bronchiectasiscentral, upper lobe saccular bronchiectasis involving segmental and subsegmental bronchi is characteristicmucoid impaction results in a bronchocoele, the finger in glove sign this may give a Y, V or toothpaste-like configurationcentrilobular nodular opacities.high attenuation (calcification) in impacted mucus in ~30% 3,4bronchial wall thickening: commonchronic disease may progress to pulmonary fibrosis, predominantly in the upper lobecavitation: 10%central, upper lobe saccular bronchiectasis involving segmental and subsegmental bronchi is characteristicmucoid impaction results in a bronchocoele, the finger in glove sign this may give a Y, V or toothpaste-like configurationcentrilobular nodular opacities.high attenuation (calcification) in impacted mucus in ~30% 3,4bronchial wall thickening: commonTreatment of ABPA is difficult due to the ubiquity of Aspergillus in the environment.
The main focus of treatment revolves around 8: managing asthmalimiting/controlling exacerbations: corticosteroid plays a major roleeradicating Aspergillus from the airway: anti-fungal agents, e.g. ketoconazolepreventing late complications, e.g. severe bronchiectasis, fibrosisMany patients are successfully managed after diagnosis and never progress clinically to stage IV or V. In stages I to III, prognosis is excellent, whereas stage V has a high 5-year mortality from respiratory failure 9.For a discussion of the differential diagnosis of bronchiectasis please refer to the article bronchiectasis and more specifically central bronchiectasis.
For mucoid impaction consider:mucoid impaction secondary to bronchiectasissecondary to an endobronchial lesionsecondary to atretic bronchial segment

Allergic fungal sinusitis is the most common form of fungal sinusitis and is common in warm and humid climates.
On imaging, it usually presents as opacification and expansion of multiple paranasal sinuses, unilaterally or bilaterally, with content that is centrally hyperdense on CT.
MRI shows T2 hypointensity centrally due to the dense fungal concretions and heavy metals.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAllergic fungal sinusitis accounts for 5-10% of chronic hypertrophic sinus disease going to surgery.
It is seen in young immunocompetent patients (mean age range 23-42 years).
In children, M:F ratio = 2:1 and in adults, M:F ratio = 1:1.4.Patients may present with chronic headaches, nasal congestion, chronic sinusitis for years, and past sinus surgery.
Allergic fungal sinusitis is an allergic reaction to aerosolized environmental fungi (type 1, IgE-mediated hypersensitivity reaction).
Expansion and even erosion (20%) of the sinuses are characteristic.
Commonly implicated fungi are 1:dematiaceous (pigmented) fungi: Bipolaris, Curvularia, Alternariahyaline molds: Aspergillus, FusariumAllergic fungal sinusitis usually involves multiple sinuses and can be unilateral or bilateral (the latter is commoner).
There is a frequently a nasal component.
The ethmoid sinus is the most common location, followed by the maxillary, frontal, and sphenoid sinuses.
asthma in 65% of casesThe majority of sinuses show near complete opacification.
On unenhanced CT, the sinuses are typically opacified by centrally (often serpiginous 7) hyperdense material with a peripheral rim of hypodense mucosa.
Approximately 40% of patients may have each of the following features 4:expansion of an involved sinusremodelling and thinning of the bone sinus wallserosion of the sinus wallHypointensity on T1WI and T2WI is the most common finding.
T1: hypointense inflamed mucosal thickness.
It can have multiple T1 appearances.
T2usually a hyperintense peripheral inflamed mucosal thicknesslow T2 signal or signal void is due to high concentration of various metals such as iron, magnesium and manganese concentrated by fungal organisms as well as high protein and low free water content in allergic mucinT1 C+ (Gd): an inflamed mucosal lining has contrast enhancement no enhancement in the center or in the majority of the sinus contents (c.f.
neoplasms)usually a hyperintense peripheral inflamed mucosal thicknesslow T2 signal or signal void is due to high concentration of various metals such as iron, magnesium and manganese concentrated by fungal organisms as well as high protein and low free water content in allergic mucinan inflamed mucosal lining has contrast enhancement no enhancement in the center or in the majority of the sinus contents (c.f.
neoplasms)Allergic fungal sinusitis is usually treated by local excision and steroid therapy.
Antifungal therapy is also attempted in some cases, but results of this treatment are equivocal.
Recurrence after surgery is not uncommon; however, the inclusion of steroid therapy significantly reduces relapse.sinonasal polyposissinus fungal mycetomait represents a fungal colonization without hyperimmune responseusually involving only the maxillary sinus sinonasal mucoceleit has the same chronic expansive featuresno bone erosionsnon-Hodgkin lymphomasinonasal mass homogeneously hyperdense on non-contrast CTit represents a fungal colonization without hyperimmune responseusually involving only the maxillary sinus it has the same chronic expansive featuresno bone erosionssinonasal mass homogeneously hyperdense on non-contrast CT

Allgrove syndrome (also known as triple A syndrome) is an autosomal recessive condition that consists of three main findings:achalasiaalacrimaACTH insensitivity

Allodynia refers to pain due to a stimulus which does not normally provoke pain.
Temperature or physical stimuli can provoke allodynia, and it often occurs after injury to a site.
The word allodynia is derived from the Greek words άλλος (állos) meaning "other" and οδύνη (odýni) meaning "pain".

Alobar holoprosencephaly is a subtype of holoprosencephaly and is the most severe of the classical three subtypes, with both semilobar and lobar holoprosencephaly having less severe clinical manifestations.
For a general discussion of epidemiology, clinical presentation, and pathology, please refer to the main article on holoprosencephaly.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAs with all types of holoprosencephaly, it is a rare congenital brain malformation in which there is failure of complete separation of the two hemispheres (which usually occurs around the 4th to 6th gestational weeks) and failure of transverse cleavage into the diencephalon and telencephalon.
As with most cerebral structural congenital abnormalities, alobar holoprosencephaly is visible on all modalities, but in general is identified on antenatal ultrasound (if performed), and best characterized by MRI.monoventriclefused thalamiabsent corpus callosumabsent interhemispheric fissureabsent cavum septi pellucidiabsence of 3rd ventriclemiddle and anterior cerebral arteries may be replaced by tangled branches of internal carotid and basilar vesselssevere facial malformationsThe basic structure of the cerebral hemispheres is lost, with variable amounts of residual cortex.
Features include 1,2:single midline monoventricle (or holosphere)lateral and third ventricles are absentabsent midline structuresabsent septum pellucidumagenesis or hypoplasia of the corpus callosumabsent interhemispheric fissure and falx cerebriabsent olfactory tractdorsal cyst of holoprosencephalyabsent, fused or normal optic nervesmiddle and anterior cerebral arteries may be replaced by tangled branches of internal carotid and basilar vesselslateral and third ventricles are absentabsent septum pellucidumagenesis or hypoplasia of the corpus callosumabsent interhemispheric fissure and falx cerebriabsent olfactory tractAssociated craniofacial features may also be present which include:proboscismono-orbit/cyclopiamononostrilhypotelorismcebocephalyThe fused cortex can take on one of three basic shapes 2:This is the most severe type of the holoprosencephaly spectrum and often tends to be fatal in the neonatal period.semilobar holoprosencephalypartial separation into hemispheresrudimentary occipital and temporal hornshydranencephalythalami are often visible and are not fusedfalx cerebri usually presentnot associated with midline facial abnormalitiesno cortex present, or sometimes small islands of tissuesevere hydrocephalusfalx cerebri usually present, but may be absent due to severe long-standing hydrocephalusbilateral choroid plexusthalami not fusednot associated with midline facial abnormalitiespartial separation into hemispheresrudimentary occipital and temporal hornsthalami are often visible and are not fusedfalx cerebri usually presentnot associated with midline facial abnormalitiesno cortex present, or sometimes small islands of tissuefalx cerebri usually present, but may be absent due to severe long-standing hydrocephalusbilateral choroid plexusthalami not fusednot associated with midline facial abnormalities

Alpha angle can refer to two different musculoskeletal measurements:alpha angle (in developmental dysplasia of the hip) in childrenalpha angle (in femoroacetabular impingement)

Alpers syndrome, also known as Alpers-Huttenlocher syndrome or progressive cerebral poliodystrophy, is a rare childhood neurodegenerative POLG-related disorder.
Along with Leigh syndrome, it is one of the commonest childhood mitochondrial disorders 1.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologySee alsoReferencesAlpers syndrome is incredibly rare.
The estimated prevalence is 1 per 100,000.
Alpers syndrome generally affects infants within the first year of life, but cases have been reported later in childhood through to early adulthood 2-4.
Affected individuals often present with severe, refractory status epilepticus 2.
Loss of motor coordination, decreased muscle tone, cognitive decline, optic nerve atrophy, and hepatic impairment are often reported in disease progression 1,5.
Autosomal recessive mutations in the DNA Polymerase Gamma, Catalytic Subunit (POLG) gene have been implicated in the majority of cases 5.
Neuroimaging findings are most frequently described.
Findings are often subtle and include low densities in the cortex and white matter, especially in the occipital lobes, and cerebral atrophy 7.Features described include:regions of increased signal intensity on T2-weighted sequences and DWI, most often in the occipital lobes and thalami, involving both the cortex and deep gray matter 7-9these regions often correspond to areas of pathological electroencephalogram (EEG) activity and may even be absent if no recent seizure activity has occurred 7-9generalized cerebral atrophy, although may have an occipital preponderance 7-9prior to development of POLG-related neurological manifestations, features of chronic hepatic encephalopathy, such as increased signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences in the globi pallidi and subthalamic regions, or acute hepatic encephalopathy may be seen 10these features may be detected in prenatal MRI 8these regions often correspond to areas of pathological electroencephalogram (EEG) activity and may even be absent if no recent seizure activity has occurred 7-9MR spectroscopy may demonstrate an elevated lactate signal intensity and a reduced NAA signal intensity, in areas of high diffusion signal 10.Treatment focuses on symptoms control.
Sodium valproate as an agent for epilepsy control is generally avoided due to its hepatotoxicity which may result in rapid decline in liver function in patients with a predisposition to liver failure, such as those with Alpers syndrome 6.Alpers syndrome often progresses rapidly, leading to death in childhood 5.
Alpers syndrome was first described by Bernard Alpers in 1931 11.
In the late 1970s, Peter Huttenlocher associated further patient phenotypes with that of Alpers' patient and the eponymous name was coined 12.POLG-related disorders

The alpha angle is a radiological measurement proposed for the diagnosis and evaluation of surgical treatment in cam-type femoroacetabular impingement (FAI).When initially described in 2002, Notzli et al.
suggested that the pathological value was >50°.
According to one study, a value measured in an oblique CT reconstruction of the femoral neck has been thought to have a high discriminating capacity for the diagnosis of symptomatic cam-type femoroacetabular impingement where if a patient complains of hip pain and an alpha angle ≥57° is found on CT, strongly suggest that cam-type FAI may be the cause 2.The term alpha angle is also used in a separate and unrelated context in the evaluation of developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH) in children.
Measured on obliquely oriented radiographs.
The Dunn projection of the hip is used.
Measured on oblique axial images as the angle between the orientation of the femoral neck and the margin of the femoral head.

The alpha angle is a measurement used in the ultrasonographic assessment of developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH).The angle is formed by the acetabular roof to the vertical cortex of the ilium and thus reflects the depth of the bony acetabular roof.
This is a similar measurement to the acetabular angle.
The normal value is greater than or equal to 60 degrees.
Less than 60 degrees suggests dysplasia of the acetabulum.
The term alpha angle is also used in a separate and unrelated context in the evaluation of femoroacetabular impingement.sonographic classification of developmental dysplasia of the hip (DDH)beta angleacetabular angle

Alpha decay is the process in which an alpha particle (containing two neutrons and two protons) is ejected from the nucleus.
An alpha particle is identical to the nucleus of a helium atom.
All nuclei with the atomic number (Z) greater than 82, are considered unstable.
These are considered “neutron-rich” and undergo alpha decay commonly.
Alpha decay occurs in the nuclei of heavy elements, like radium, uranium, thorium etc.
When a nucleus of Ra (radium) decays, it emits an alpha particle and becomes an Rn (radon) nucleus.
In general, during alpha decay, the atomic number (Z) is reduced by two, and the mass number (A), by four.
For example, alpha decay generates Rn-222 with atomic number 86 and the mass number 222 from Ra-226 with the atomic number 88 and the mass number 226.Alpha particles are very heavy and contain high amounts of energy (4-10 MeV).
Their speed is ~20000km/s and they interact with matter, causing much ionization over a very short distance.
They usually pass short distances (a 5 MeV alpha particle will travel about 20 micrometers in silicon) and can be stopped by a sheet of paper.
Alpha particles do not produce Bremsstrahlung radiation when slowing down.
Alpha particles are not generally dangerous unless the source is ingested or inhaled since alpha radiation is the most destructive form of ionizing radiation.
Historically, radium and radon were the principal alpha emitters of medical interest.
These are no longer used in medicine.
Other alpha emitters are being researched for therapeutic approaches using radiopharmaceuticals that can target the delivery of short half-life alpha emitters into cancerous cells.
Due to their very short range, alpha particles have the potential to deliver a lethal radiation dose to small metastatic cell clusters, while mostly sparing the surrounding tissue.
All work with alpha emitters must be conducted under very strictly controlled conditions.beta decay

Alpha fetoprotein (AFP) is an important plasma protein synthesized by the yolk sac and fetal liver.
In adults its main utility is as a tumor marker, primarily for hepatocellular carcinoma or teratoma.
Functionally it is the fetal homologue of albumin i.e. it acts as a major carrier protein in the antenatal circulation.
It is encoded for by the AFP gene 1.This may occur in a broad spectrum of conditions:liver tumors (hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatoblastoma)<10 ng/mL is within normal limits>20 ng/mL is above normal limits but has low specificity for tumor since it may occur in a setting of diffuse liver injuryincreasing AFP over time, especially with stable AST and ALT is suspiciousAFP has a low sensitivity and specificity for hepatic malignancyin the presence of an HCC, an elevated AFP level is indicative of an aggressive tumor 5pancreatic tumors pancreatoblastomaantenatal conditions (maternal serum AFP (MSAFP))normal pregnancyrises from 12 weeks and peaks during the early 3rd trimesterincreased in multifetal pregnancyneural tube defectsomphaloceleOEIS complexcloacal exstrophygastroschisislimb-body wall complexplacental chorioangiomaplacental lakesgerm cell tumorssacrococcygeal teratomaintracranial embryonal carcinomaovarian embryonal carcinoma 4immature teratomaimmature ovarian teratoma 4epignathusyolk sac tumorstesticular yolk sac tumorovarian yolk sac tumor 4intracranial yolk sac tumorovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor (rarely) 4other tumorsfetal adenocarcinoma of the lung 6non-malignant conditionsbiliary atresiachronic active hepatitiscirrhosishereditary tyrosinemia type Ihereditary persistence of AFP<10 ng/mL is within normal limits>20 ng/mL is above normal limits but has low specificity for tumor since it may occur in a setting of diffuse liver injuryincreasing AFP over time, especially with stable AST and ALT is suspiciousAFP has a low sensitivity and specificity for hepatic malignancyin the presence of an HCC, an elevated AFP level is indicative of an aggressive tumor 5pancreatoblastomanormal pregnancyrises from 12 weeks and peaks during the early 3rd trimesterincreased in multifetal pregnancyneural tube defectsomphaloceleOEIS complexcloacal exstrophygastroschisislimb-body wall complexplacental chorioangiomaplacental lakesrises from 12 weeks and peaks during the early 3rd trimesterincreased in multifetal pregnancysacrococcygeal teratomaintracranial embryonal carcinomaovarian embryonal carcinoma 4immature teratomaimmature ovarian teratoma 4epignathusyolk sac tumorstesticular yolk sac tumorovarian yolk sac tumor 4intracranial yolk sac tumorovarian Sertoli-Leydig cell tumor (rarely) 4immature ovarian teratoma 4testicular yolk sac tumorovarian yolk sac tumor 4intracranial yolk sac tumorfetal adenocarcinoma of the lung 6fetal adenocarcinoma of the lung 6biliary atresiachronic active hepatitiscirrhosishereditary tyrosinemia type Ihereditary persistence of AFPThis may be seen in pregnancy.
AFP reduction may be associated with: certain chromosomal anomaliesDown syndromeTurner syndrometrisomy 13trisomy 18Cornelia de-Lange syndrome 2Down syndromeTurner syndrometrisomy 13trisomy 18tumor markers

Alpha-thalassemia/intellectual disability syndrome X-linked (ATRX) gene is an important genomic marker of gliomas and is either intact (ATRX wild-type) or mutated (ATRX-mutant) and is correlated with other important genomic markers including IDH, 1p19q codeletion and p53 expression 1,2.
ATRX and IDHATRX and 1p19q co-deletionATRX and p53 expressionRelated articlesReferencesTumors with ATRX mutation (ATRX-mt) are usually associated with IDH positive (mutated) tumors, and when both are present a better prognosis can be expected over tumors with IDH1 positive but intact ATRX (ATRX-wt) 1-3.
Mutation of ATRX is almost never seen in patients with 1p/19q co-deletion (i.e. they are essentially mutually exclusive).
Oligodendrogliomas will, therefore, have intact ATRX and 1p19q co-deletion whereas IDH-mt astrocytomas will usually, but not always, have ATRX-mt but no 1p19q co-deletion 1-3.
ATRX-mt is usually associated with increased p53 expression 2.

Alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) deficiency is a hereditary metabolic disorder and is the most common genetic cause of emphysema and metabolic liver disease in children.
It results in the unopposed action of neutrophil elastase and subsequent severe basal panlobular emphysema and respiratory symptoms.
Accumulation of altered alpha-1-antitrypsin in hepatocytes incites an inflammatory response and chronic liver disease.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresThe classic presentation of the disease is with dyspnea in the 4th to 5th decades of life.
Two-thirds of individuals show clinical features but most carriers are asymptomatic.
Alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) is a protein that prevents enzymes such as elastase from degrading normal host tissue.
Over 90% of the alpha-1-antitrypsin protein is produced in hepatocytes by codominant gene expression on chromosome 14.
The alpha-1-antitrypsin protein inhibits neutrophil elastase.
In patients with severe deficiency, the neutrophil elastase acts unopposed resulting in damage to the lower respiratory tract.
This damage is predominantly basal because of the gravitational distribution of pulmonary blood flow.asthmapancreatitisaneurysms, including intracranial aneurysms 18panlobular emphysemathe emphysema pattern was traditionally thought to be panlobular, although more recent studies have also suggested a variable pattern to the emphysemabasal predominance, in contradistinction to centrilobular emphysema, which shows apical predominance; the two conditions can coexist in smokersemphysema may develop in 75-85% of cases 12bronchiectasis: up to 40% 9frank bullae formation: non-specific feature 13bronchial wall thickening: non-specific feature 13hepatopulmonary syndromepanlobular emphysemathe emphysema pattern was traditionally thought to be panlobular, although more recent studies have also suggested a variable pattern to the emphysemabasal predominance, in contradistinction to centrilobular emphysema, which shows apical predominance; the two conditions can coexist in smokersemphysema may develop in 75-85% of cases 12Reduced perfusion and ventilation in the lower zones on a ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) study.
Hepatic manifestations of this disease are those of cirrhosis.
Emphysema and cirrhosis are usually considered the most common causes of death 8.Survival is substantially worse in smokers, who have a 20-year decrease in longevity relative to non-smokers.
According to one study, the overall median survival time was ~55 years 7.Alpha-1-antitrypsin replacement therapy, most often by weekly intravenous infusions of alpha-1-antitrypsin purified from human plasma, has been used in some situations to partially correct the biochemical defect 14,15.
While randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials have confirmed a reduction in the decline in lung density in patients receiving augmentation therapy 14, its efficacy in reducing mortality is uncertain 16.
Other management strategies include avoidance of smoking and of other risk factors for cirrhosis.cirrhosis with increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma 19A1AT deficiency carriers are at 70-100% increased risk of lung cancer 20The differential will depend on the organ involved:for thoracic manifestations: see differential for panlobular emphysemafor hepatic manifestations: see differential for cirrhosis

The alphanumeric system of dental notation is a modification of Palmer notation for numbering and naming teeth made for electronic transcription.
Its use is primarily in the United Kingdom 1,3,4.Permanent teethPrimary teethSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresFirst, the jaws are divided into four quadrants 1-5.
Each quadrant is denoted by their English initialism for upper (U) or lower (L) jaw and the patient's right (R) or left (L) side:right upper (maxillary) quadrant = URleft upper (maxillary) quadrant = ULleft lower (mandibular) quadrant = LLright lower (mandibular) quadrant = LRAs in the Palmer notation and FDI World Dental Federation notation systems, individual teeth within each quadrant of the dental arches are then numbered from mesial to distal:central incisor = 1lateral incisor = 2canine/cuspid = 31st premolar/bicuspid = 42nd premolar/bicuspid = 51st molar = 62nd molar = 73rd molar = 8The quadrant designation is the prefix, followed by the individual tooth number.
Therefore, the notation UR1 indicates the permanent right upper central incisor.
As in the Palmer notation, the deciduous teeth are lettered A through E from mesial to distal in each quadrant 5:central incisor = Alateral incisor = Bcanine = C1st molar = D2nd molar = EThe prefix for each quadrant is as in the permanent teeth.
Therefore, the notation LRB indicates the primary right lower lateral incisor.
Fédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI) notationAmerican Dental Association (ADA) Universal Numbering SystemPalmer notation

Alport syndrome is an X-linked dominant disease characterized by progressive sensorineural hearing loss, renal disease and, at times, ocular lesions.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresHistory and etymologyReferencesCases and figureshematuriasensorineural hearing loss: typically high frequency 2ocular abnormalitiesanterior lenticonus: most common ocular abnormality; may result in cataractsperimacular pigmentary changesflecks around the fovea 2multiple leiomyomas 1,2esophagustracheobronchial treefemale genitaliaanterior lenticonus: most common ocular abnormality; may result in cataractsperimacular pigmentary changesflecks around the fovea 2esophagustracheobronchial treefemale genitaliaIt is the result of a mutation in collagen type IV, which is found in the basement membrane of the glomerulus, the cochlea and the eye.
Mutations may be inherited in X-linked dominant (most common), autosomal recessive, or autosomal dominant patterns 7.
In its most common form, males are predictably more severely affected, although females also demonstrate abnormalities 2.mid face hypoplasia 3Normal size and echotexture in early stage, however advanced disease may show small, shrunken and echogenic kidneys.
Kidneys may be shrunken with delayed or non-excretion of contrast in advanced stages.
Multiple leiomyomas can be seen in esophagus 5, tracheobronchial tree, or uterus.
MRI brain may show patchy/nodular lesions in gangliothalamic complexes, with reduced white matter myelination 4.Named for Arthur Cecil Alport (1880-1959), an English physician.

Mammographic screening detects early breast cancers and thereby reduces potential mortality.
However, its sensitivity is inversely related to breast density 1.
Altered density between two mammograms can arise in a number of situations:interval commencement/cessation of hormone replacement therapy: there is increased breast density visible on mammography when patients are on hormone replacement therapy.
The changes reverse on cessation of therapy.lactation: in practice ultrasound is the imaging modality of choice during lactation as the patients are young and the increased density of the breast during lactation makes mammographic imaging difficult.
worsening/resolution of congestive cardiac failureworsening/resolution of fluid overload from other causes substantial weight loss/weight gain: Significant changes in the body mass index have a profound impact on the density of breasts on mammography.
interval precipitation of SVC syndromeidiopathic granulomatous lobular mastitis (IGLM)medications: e.g. Danazol decreases densityvitamin D and calcium intake in pre-menopausal women: decreases densityincreasing age: Involution of the breast implies that the ratio gland: fat decreases thereby decreasing density on mammogram.
radiation therapy: this is an important etiology for increased breast density which is seen only on the irradiated breast.
The changes continue even after the radiation has been stopped.
lymphatic blockagemalignancy: e.g. invasive lobular carcinoma especially if affecting part of the breastbreast density

Alternating radiolucent and radiodense metaphyseal lines can be seen with a number of conditions and the differential diagnosis is wide:growth arrest linesbisphosphonate therapyrickets: especially those on prolonged treatment, e.g. vitamin D dependent ricketsosteopetrosischemotherapychronic anemia: e.g. sickle cell anemia and thalassemiatreated leukemiazebra stripe signdense metaphyseal bands: differential and mnemoniclucent metaphyseal bands

Alternatives are part of multiple choice questions, comprising the options from which an examinee must choose the correct answer.
Each multiple choice question should have, ideally, 5 alternatives, one of which is the correct answer (the "key").
In some instances, 5 options are not appropriate, and 4 - 6 options are acceptable.
shortalternatives should be as short as possible with the majority of the text in the stemif a term is going to be repeated in each alternative, then it should be moved into the stem or lead insimilar in lengthshould all be approximately the same lengthhave similar language and grammar to avoid inadvertent cluessimilar contentshould be similar in content and phrasing to avoid one alternative clearly as the odd-one-outif homogeneity of answers is not possible, then have a similar number of alternatives for each type (balanced)similar scaleif numbers are used in the alternatives, they should all be in the same unit of measurenon-overlapping rangesavoid overlapping numeric or verbal ranges  i.e. 0-5, 5-10 (5 is repeated).
Instead, use 0-5, 6-10.balanced alternativesIf 3 alternatives have the word aorta in it, then you probably need 3 other alternatives with a repeated word to ensure that no clue is presentalternatives should be as short as possible with the majority of the text in the stemif a term is going to be repeated in each alternative, then it should be moved into the stem or lead inshould all be approximately the same lengthhave similar language and grammar to avoid inadvertent cluesshould be similar in content and phrasing to avoid one alternative clearly as the odd-one-outif homogeneity of answers is not possible, then have a similar number of alternatives for each type (balanced)if numbers are used in the alternatives, they should all be in the same unit of measureavoid overlapping numeric or verbal ranges  i.e. 0-5, 5-10 (5 is repeated).
Instead, use 0-5, 6-10.If 3 alternatives have the word aorta in it, then you probably need 3 other alternatives with a repeated word to ensure that no clue is presentAlternatives should be presented in a non-random order.
This not only reduces cognitive effort in parsing the alternatives but also enforces a more random selection of the correct answer.
For sets of alternatives that have a natural order, this should be in ascending order.
Examples include:values: e.g. 2, 6, 8, 12, 20ranges: e.g. 0-5, 6 -10, 11-15density/intensity: e.g. hypodense, isodense, hyperdenseanatomic: e.g. head, neck, chest, abdomen, pelvisWhen no such natural order exists, then answers should be presented in alphabetical order.
compound answers: alternatives such a "B & C" or "A, B and D" are to be avoidedall or none of the above: it is generally better to have fewer alternatives than to add filler alternatives such as thesesilly or obvious alternatives: obviously correct or obviously incorrect answers, even if humorous, detract from learningclueing: the correct answer can be guessed without any actual knowledge of the topic.
Examples of some types of clues to be avoided:some terms repeated more often than in othersuse of 'never' or 'always'repeating words from the stemsome terms repeated more often than in othersuse of 'never' or 'always'repeating words from the stemThe style of alternatives should be similar to that of bulleted and numbered lists for the rest of Radiopaedia.
In other words, they should not be capitalized (except if a proper noun or acronym etc...) nor should they end with full stops.
The exception to this rule is if each alternative is a complete sentence or if the question is a 'complete the sentence' sort of question (i.e. where the stem finished in ... ).

The Alvarado score is a clinical decision rule and predictor of the likelihood of acute appendicitis:right lower quadrant tenderness (+2)elevated temperature (37.3°C or 99.1°F) (+1)rebound tenderness (+1)migration of pain to the right lower quadrant (+1)anorexia (+1)nausea or vomiting (+1)leukocytosis >10,000 (+2)leukocytosis left shift (+1)Score total:5-6 compatible with acute appendicitis7-8 probable acute appendicitis9-10 very probable acute appendicitisThe score can be useful for decision making when evaluating nonspecific imaging or equivocal ultrasound findings 2.The score may be more useful for ruling out appendicitis with a score <5, than "ruling in" appendicitis with a >7 score 3.

Alveolar echinococcosis, also referred as hepatic alveolar echinococcosis or E. alveolaris, is a more aggressive and invasive form of hepatic hydatid disease caused by Echinococcus multilocularis.
It mimics a slow-growing tumor, as in contrast to E. granulosus it does not form a well defined encapsulated mass, but rather infiltrates the liver and its surrounding structures, especially at the porta hepatis (portal vein, hepatic veins, inferior vena cava (IVC), and the biliary tree).For a general discussion, particularly epidemiology and pathology, but also for links to other system-specific manifestations, please refer to the article on hydatid disease.
TerminologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAlthough the condition is also named as Echinococcus alveolaris or E. alveolaris, note that this is not the species name.
It commonly presents as large irregular cystic/necrotic masses with a characteristic lobar involvement, peripheral calcifications, and no significant enhancement.
Extension into the biliary tree, portal vein, hepatic vein, or IVC is characteristic of this pattern of hydatid disease.
large irregular mostly hypoechoic mass with central anechoic areas and scattered peripheral foci of calcificationperipheral thick hyperechogenicity may be present representing fibrous tissueless common presentations representing up to a third of the cases:multiple clustered hyperechoic nodules (hailstorm pattern 1)pseudocyst characterized by a massive necrotic areaIVC, hepatic and portal vein invasion may be presentbiliary duct involvement usually characterized by asymmetric/focal intrahepatic biliary tree dilatationmultiple clustered hyperechoic nodules (hailstorm pattern 1)pseudocyst characterized by a massive necrotic arealarge (~10 cm) multiloculated/confluent necrotic massirregular marginsperipheral scattered calcificationscentral hypoattenuating necrotic areasdiffuse lobar involvementusually, no relevant enhancement is observed after intravenous contrast administrationsurrounding fibroinflammatory enhancement may be present on a delayed phase 1irregular marginsperipheral scattered calcificationscentral hypoattenuating necrotic areassurrounding fibroinflammatory enhancement may be present on a delayed phase 1T1: intermediate signal intensity T2high T2 signal intensity within the multiple small cystic lesions and central necrotic componentsmarked low T2 signal intensity at the peripheral fibrotic tissue 1MRCP: useful to assess the biliary distortion, compression, and dilatation, as well as communication and extension of the parenchymal cystic/necrotic lesions into the biliary tree 1T1 C+ (Gd): no enhancement within the mass lesionhigh T2 signal intensity within the multiple small cystic lesions and central necrotic componentsmarked low T2 signal intensity at the peripheral fibrotic tissue 1MRCP: useful to assess the biliary distortion, compression, and dilatation, as well as communication and extension of the parenchymal cystic/necrotic lesions into the biliary tree 1cystic hepatic metastaseshepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)biliary cystadenocarcinoma or cystadenoma 1

Alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas are a type of rhabdomyosarcoma and account for 20-40% of all rhabdomyosarcomas 1-2.EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresReferencesCases and figuresUnlike embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas, which are more common, these tumors occur in slightly older individuals, typically 10-25 years of age 1.
Although these tumors can be found essentially anywhere, they are more frequently situated in the deep compartments of the extremities 1-2.Specific genetic abnormalities have been identified, that are specific for alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas.
They include t(2;13) and t(1;13) chromosomal translocations resulting in PAX3-FKHR and PAX7-FKHR gene fusions 2.Compared to the other two types (embryonal and pleomorphic rhabdomyosarcomas) it has the worst prognosis 1.The features are non-specific (see radiographic features in the parent article: rhabdomyosarcoma), although in general alveolar rhabdomyosarcomas tend to have multiple areas of necrosis 1.

Alveolar sarcoidosis is an atypical pulmonary manifestation of sarcoidosis.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThis appearance may be apparent in approximately 4% of those with pulmonary sarcoidosis on plain film 1 and up to 15% on CT 2.This appearance is thought to result from the aggregation of a vast number of interstitial granulomas rather than representing a true alveolar process.
Some authors have therefore applied a more appropriate term, pseudoalveolar sarcoidosis.
There can be large areas of pulmonary opacification ranging in diameter from 1 to 4 cm.
These can be rounded or elongated in shape, have irregular edges and blurred margins, with or without air bronchograms.
They are typically found either along the bronchovascular bundles or in the lung periphery adjacent to the pleural surface (i.e., subpleural) 3.When these opacities are accompanied by multiple surrounding nodules, representing granulomas as well, the entire conglomerate is often termed the galaxy sign.
Another pattern of alveolar sarcoidosis is an appearance termed "fairy ring", which refers to circumferentially organized opacities.
In this situation, a reverse halo sign may be seen.
Other CT abnormalities such as nodules, ground-glass opacities, thickened bronchovascular bundles, and thickened interlobular septa are often seen.
With prompt and appropriate treatment the parenchymal changes are usually reversible 6.sarcoidosis

Alveolar soft part sarcomas (ASPS) are rare, highly vascular, deep soft tissue malignancy that is classically seen in the lower extremities of young adults.
They account for <1% of all soft tissue sarcomas.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThere is a slight female predilection in patients less than 30 years old 1.Though it can occur anywhere in the body, it is most frequently seen in the lower extremities, followed by the trunk and upper extremities in adults.
Whereas in infants and children, the majority of cases occur in the head and neck 6.Distant metastases at the time of diagnosis is a relatively common feature, with metastases often spreading haematogenously to the lungs, bone, and brain1,4.ASPS derives its name from its histological appearance1.
It is characterized by well-defined nests of large round or polygonal tumor cells with generous eosinophilic cytoplasm, separated by fibrous stroma7.
They are arranged in the classic alveolar growth pattern with minimal to no mitotic figures.
Vascular invasion is a common feature.
The cells are PAS-positive with diastase-resistant intracytoplasmic inclusions1.There is strong strong nuclear staining by an antibody directed against the C‐terminus of the transcription factor E3 (TFE3) gene,  which shows sensitivity and specificity of 92% for ASPS 11.
Slightly hyperdense soft tissue mass on non-contrast CT, and on contrast-enhanced CT, a vascular mass with heterogeneous enhancement 8.
CT angiography will demonstrate a hypervascular mass with multiple, enlarged tortuous vessels feeding the tumor 8.
MRI is recommended for imaging evaluation, where they present as a large, highly vascular mass 9:T1: isointense or slightly hyperintenseT2 hyperintense; associated vascular signal voids are common secondary to large peritumoral blood vessels.
T1C+: heterogeneous contrast enhancementFor localized disease without metastases, aggressive treatment with surgery and radiation is indicated 5.
For patients presenting with distant metastases, surgery alone is the preferred treatment option 5.Alveolar soft part sarcoma is highly malignant, with a relatively indolent, yet relentless course.
The overall prognosis is poor given the high frequency of metastatic disease 1.
A large study indicated that the median survival time was 3 years if metastatic disease was present at diagnosis and 11 years without metastatic disease at presentation 2,4.
Another study showed survival rates of 77% at 2 years, 60% at 5 years, 38% at 10 years and only 15% at 20 years 10.
Differential diagnosis includes:malignant fibrous histiocytoma: MRI shows necrosis, cystic regions and edema 3synovial sarcoma: slow-growing and superficial tumor, without flow voids on MRI, and with calcification, necrosis and hemorrhage often noted on CT 3angiosarcoma: more common in malesosteosarcoma: typical sunburst appearance on radiographs and is usually centered within the bonevascular malformations (e.g. AVM): demonstrates pure vascular tissue and no accompanying solid tumor 3soft tissue tumors (WHO 2002 classification)soft-tissue sarcomas

Alzheimer type I glia are a type of glial cell.
They are large multinucleated astrocytes encountered in glial tumors and progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) 1.

The alveoli (singular: alveolus) are tiny hollow air sacs that comprise the basic unit of respiration.
Alveoli are found within the lung parenchyma and are found at the terminal ends of the respiratory tree, clustered around alveolar sacs and alveolar ducts.
Each alveolus is approximately 0.2 mm in diameter.
There are around 300 million to 1 billion alveoli in the human lungs, covering an area of 70 square meters 1.The alveolar walls are comprised of collagen and elastic fibers which facilitate expansion during inspiration and return to the original shape during expiration 2.
There are numerous capillaries within the alveolar walls where gas exchange occurs.
Pores of Kohn are also located within the walls.
Alveoli contain two major types of epithelial cells 3.
The most abundant, type 1 pneumocytes (95%) are squamous cells in which gas exchange occurs.
The remaining 5%, type 2 pneumocytes, are granular cells which secrete surfactant.
Surfactant is a lipoprotein with a high phospholipid content which reduces surface tension.
This increases pulmonary compliance, prevents atelectasis and aids recruitment of collapsed airways.
Alveolar macrophages are also located in the alveoli.
They protect the alveoli from foreign material by engulfing it, including bacteria, dust and carbon particles.respiratory distress syndrome

Alzheimer disease is a common neurodegenerative disease, responsible for 60-80% of all dementias, and imposing a significant burden on developed nations.
It is the result of accumulation and deposition of cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) and is the most common cerebral amyloid deposition disease.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAlzheimer disease is the most common cause of dementia, responsible for 60-80% of all dementias 2,7.
The prevalence is strongly linked to age, with >1% of 60-64-year-old patients being diagnosed with the condition, compared to 20-40% of those over 85-90 years of age 2.Risk factors include 2,7:advanced agefemale genderapolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 (epsilon 4) allele carrier statuscurrent smokingfamily history of dementiamutations of amyloid precursor proteinDown syndromeIn addition to the genetic and environmental factors above, the age of presentation is also influenced by socioeconomic factors 2,4: formal educationincomeoccupational statussocial network and family supportIndividuals with premorbid higher function/supports are able to compensate for early disease changes to a greater degree and thus present later.
Consequently, when well-supported patients eventually present, they tend to have more marked morphological changes on imaging 4.Traditionally, Alzheimer disease has been clinically characterized predominantly by memory deficits, at least in initial stages.
It has become increasingly evident that in addition to the typical presentation, a number of atypical clinical patterns exist, which are nonetheless pathologically Alzheimer disease.
The typical patient with Alzheimer disease will present initially with antegrade episodic memory deficits 1,5.
Over time (often years), the disease progresses, with eventual involvement of attentional and executive processes, semantic memory, praxis, and visuoperceptual abilities 1.
Neuropsychiatric symptoms are also common and eventually affect almost all patients.
These include apathy, depression, anxiety, aggression/agitation, and psychosis (delusions and hallucinations) 2.These entities, often recognized clinically well before they were identified to be pathologically identical to Alzheimer disease, are characterized by slowly progressive focal cortical atrophy, with symptoms and signs matched to the affected area 1.
Examples include:posterior cortical atrophyfrontal variant of Alzheimer diseaseminority of cases with predominant semantic dementiaClinical diagnosis is made by identifying a progressive decline in memory both with clinical examinations and neuropsychologic tests and has been historically based on the NINCDS-ADRA criteria, which divides patients according to the certainty of the diagnosis into 5: 81% sensitive, 73% specific 5Although using longitudinal clinical criteria is highly sensitive in diagnosing a dementia of any type (>90%), they are relatively inaccurate (<70%) in diagnosing Alzheimer disease specifically 3.Importantly, the NINCDS-ADRA criteria only include imaging and laboratory examination or blood and CSF in excluding other causes.
The only definitive diagnostic test is brain biopsy which in practice is rarely obtained.
As such, the combination of clinical features and neuroimaging are usually considered sufficient, although, especially with the recognition of variants, this approach undoubtedly misdiagnoses a significant number of cases.
A number of CSF biomarkers are being used which may further aid in diagnosis.
These include beta-amyloid, total tau, and hyperphosphorylated tau 2.Alzheimer disease is characterized by the accumulation within the brain of cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ or Abeta) forming neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles and eventually progressive loss of neurons 2,7.Cerebral amyloid-β particularly deposits in association areas of the neocortex, the posterior cingulate and precuneus, as well as the limbic cortex, although the reason for this distribution has not been elucidated 7.
The underlying reason for the accumulation of senile (neuritic) plaques and neurofibrillary tangles remains poorly understood, as does the reason for non-uniform distribution in the cortex.
Although CT is able to demonstrate the characteristic patterns of cortical atrophy, MRI is more sensitive to these changes and better able to exclude other causes of dementia (e.g. multi-infarct dementia) and as such is the favored modality.
In addition to structural imaging, molecular imaging with PET is increasingly of value in the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease.
The primary role of MRI (and CT for that matter) in the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease is the assessment of volume change in characteristic locations which can yield a diagnostic accuracy of up to 87% 3.
Unfortunately, such volume loss is not apparent early in the course of the disease 7.
The diagnosis should be made on the basis of two features:Mesial temporal lobe atrophy can be assessed directly or indirectly.
Direct assessment is of hippocampal or parahippocampal volume loss while indirect assessment relies on an enlargement of the parahippocampal fissures.
The former is more sensitive and specific but ideally, requires actual volumetric calculations rather than 'eyeballing' the scan 3.
These measures have been combined in the medial temporal atrophy score which has been shown to be predictive of progression from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia 5,6.
Additionally, and particularly relevant to posterior cortical atrophy or early-onset Alzheimer disease, is the presence of parietal atrophy.
This is often best seen on the interhemispheric surface of the parietal lobe  (see neurodegenerative MRI brain: an approach) by examining the posterior cingulate sulcal and parieto-occipital sulcal size and degree of atrophy of the precuneus and cortical surface of the parietal lobe.
This has also been combined into a scoring system (see posterior atrophy score of parietal atrophy a.k.a.
Koedam score).
Brain volume measurements, assessed with segmentation, demonstrate that patients with Alzheimer disease have accelerated rates of brain volume loss, typically around twice normal (1% vs ~0.5% per year) 7.
This is even more marked in the hippocampi, with affected individuals exhibiting three times the volume loss per year (~4.5% vs ~1.5% per year) 7.
SPECT and PET are able to detect regional hypoperfusion/hypometabolism in a biparietal and bitemporal distribution.
F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET typically shows bilateral temporoparietal, precuneus and posterior cingulate hypometabolism which is usually symmetric.
Uptake may be asymmetric in the early stages.
The anterior cingulate, visual cortex (provided the eyes were kept open during uptake time), basal ganglia, thalami, occipital lobes and cerebellum are usually spared.
Classically, even late in the disease, the sensorimotor cortices are relatively spared 10.
Frontal lobes may be involved in late stage 7.
C-11 Pittsburgh compound B, as well as newer compounds such as F-18 florbetapir (trade name Amyvid), F-18 flutemetamol (trade name Vizamyl), and F-18 florbetaben (trade name NeuraCeq), are PET tracers that bind preferentially to beta-amyloid fibrils and thus may be able to improve the specificity of antemortem diagnosis 8,9, although there is considerable overlap with normal controls 2,7.With increased cerebral amyloid-β (Aβ) deposition, increased activity is demonstrated in the cortex 7.
It is particularly useful in excluding Alzheimer disease as the cause of dementia, as a negative amyloid PET scan renders the diagnosis unlikely 7.
Newer PET agents that bind tau proteins in neurofibrillary tangles are being investigated (e.g. 18F-flortaucipir) which result in increased activity in the expected locations of deposition in Alzheimer disease (hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and temporal and parietal cortex) 7,10.
These agents are, however, not specific to Alzheimer disease and will also deposit in other tauopathies (e.g. chronic traumatic encephalopathy and progressive supranuclear palsy) 10.
There is no cure for this disease; some drugs have been developed trying to improve symptoms or, at least, temporarily slow down their progression.cholinesterase inhibitors e.g. donepezilpartial NMDA receptor antagonistsmedications for behavioral symptomsantidepressantsanxiolyticsantiparkinsonian (movement symptoms)anticonvulsants/sedatives (behavioral)antidepressantsanxiolyticsantiparkinsonian (movement symptoms)anticonvulsants/sedatives (behavioral)

Alzheimer type II glia are a type of glial cell.
They are a pathological reactive astrocyte seen in the brain, unrelated to Alzheimer disease.
They are seen most frequently in Wilson disease, but also in other systemic metabolic disorders, particularly those with elevated ammonia levels, typically due to hepatic impairment but sometimes also seen in other causes of systemic metabolic impairment, such as impaired renal function 1,2.
They are seen in grey matter, particularly deep grey matter nuclei (e.g. putamina, globus pallidi and dentate nuclei) 1,2.
Microscopically these reactive astrocytes demonstrate enlarged pale nuclei, due to inconspicuous chromatin granules, with one or two sharply demarcated PAS-positive bodies adjacent to the nuclear membrane 1.
GFAP staining of the cell body is poor 2.
On electron microscopy, numerous mitochondria are evident 1.
​

Amastia is a rare congenital condition characterized by the absence of breast tissue, nipple and areola.
This may occur unilaterally or bilaterally.
During embryological development, breasts first appear as ectoderm ridges during the 6th week of gestation.
This ridge grows thicker and leads to mesodermal compression.
With further proliferation of the ectodermal cells there is a growth of the same into the mesodermal layer leading to a formation of clusters which further form lobules.
In the fifth month of gestation some cords of ectodermal cells sprout from each of these lobules with the central parts undergoing apoptosis leading to formation of ducts.
Similarly on the surface, apoptosis occurs leading to formation of pits which protrude through the nipples after connecting with the formed ducts.
An inhibition at any one stage of this development leads to hypoplasia or aplasia of the breastDefined as amastia involving just one side.
It is often seen to be associated with absence of pectoral muscle.
In these cases there is amastia on both sides.
It is often associated with many other congenital anomalies.teratogen exposurethoracotomy-associated injuriesradiotherapy burns

Amaurosis fugax is the transient monocular loss of vision, normally lasting a few seconds to a few minutes, secondary to vascular ischemia or insufficiency.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsReferencesIt has an incidence of 50,000 per year in the United States.
Patients present with transient monocular, painless, loss of vision lasting seconds to minutes, with full resolution.
Common etiologies include:thromboembolicatherosclerotic emboli traveling to and disrupting ophthalmic circulation, especially from ipsilateral carotid arterycardiac emboli from valvular disease (e.g. rheumatic heart disease, infective endocarditis)hemodynamic hypoperfusion secondary to increased metabolic demands on a background of severe atherosclerotic vessels or acute hypovolemia retinal arterial- or vaso-spasm (e.g. giant cell arteritis)ocular vascular diseaseneurological (e.g. optic neuritis)atherosclerotic emboli traveling to and disrupting ophthalmic circulation, especially from ipsilateral carotid arterycardiac emboli from valvular disease (e.g. rheumatic heart disease, infective endocarditis)hypoperfusion secondary to increased metabolic demands on a background of severe atherosclerotic vessels or acute hypovolemia retinal arterial- or vaso-spasm (e.g. giant cell arteritis)Although different etiologies will have different radiographic features, a work-up of a patient presenting with amaurosis fugax may include:Duplex ultrasound of carotid arteriesidentifying occulsion, stenosis and ulcerations at the bifurcation consider CTA or MRA echocardiogram to identify cardio-embolic causes identifying occulsion, stenosis and ulcerations at the bifurcation Management depends on the underlying cause.
During the work-up, modifiable risk factors should be addressed (e.g. smoking cessation, control of diabetes mellitus, control of hyperlipidemia) and patients may be commenced on aspirin for stroke prevention (the annual incidence of stroke in patients with amaurosis fugax is 2%).migrainemultiple sclerosisanterior ischemic optic neuropathy (AION)central or branch retinal artery occlusion (CRAO/BRAO)central retinal vein occulsion (CRVO)acute angle-closure glaucomaprevention of stroke is key from this presentation

Amazia is a rare congenital condition defined by the absence of glandular parenchyma in either one or both of the breasts and a normal nipple and areola complex.
This is a very rare entity and the true prevalence is not known.
Although there are strict definition criteria, the diagnosis is often made clinically, where there may be overlap (see related conditions below) 2.One case with associated bilateral choanal atresia has been reported 3.The diagnosis of amazia by the absence of glandular breast tissue with preserved nipple and areola complex can be done by ultrasound or mammography.congenital atheliaamastiahypoplasiaPoland syndrome

The ambient cistern is part of the subarachnoid cisterns, filled with CSF.The ambient cistern is a thin, sheet-like extension of the quadrigeminal cistern that extends laterally around the midbrain and posterior to the thalami.
It acts as the connection between the quadrigeminal cistern and the interpeduncular cistern.
The term "ambient cistern" may be used to refer to these connections and the quadrigeminal cistern as a whole.
It contains several vessels and nerves:posterior cerebral arteriessuperior cerebellar arteriesbasal veins of Rosenthaltrochlear nerve (CN IV)

Amelia refers to a skeletal dysplasia characterized by the complete absence of upper or lower extremity or all four limbs.
It may be associated with other congenital anomalies, i.e. omphalocele and diaphragmatic hernias 3.EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresPrognosis and treatmentDifferential diagnosisReferencesAmelia is a very rare congenital anomaly with an incidence rate of 0.04-0.15 per 10000 live births 1.
Such type of limb anomalies are associated with 4:thalidomide exposure - thalidomide embryopathyRoberts syndromeThe arrest in the formation of primordial limb bud(s) during the early phase (before the 8th week of gestation) of embryogenesis, may be due to some mechanical, vascular insult or teratogenic exposure.
Antenatal ultrasound may be able to diagnose amelia especially after the latter half of the first trimester as a gross absence of one or more limbs with associated other anomalies.
The prognosis depends upon the severity of other associated anomalies.
More than 60% of newborns die early postnatally due to complicated amelia 2.Imaging differential considerations include 2:congenital limb amputationphocomeliasirenomelia (mermaid syndrome)

Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma (AFO) is a rare benign mixed odontogenic tumor that usually arises in the maxilla and mandible.
According to the 2005 WHO classification of odontogenic tumors, it is defined as a benign tumor that resembles ameloblastic fibroma but contains enamel and dentin.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAmeloblastic ﬁbro-odontoma is most frequently diagnosed in the 1st and 2nd decades of life with a peak age between 8 and 12 years, and does not show any gender or anatomic site predilection.
The prevalence of ameloblastic ﬁbro-odontoma is in the range of 0–3.4% within odontogenic tumors among different regions.
Clinical presentation is with painless swelling, usually along the posterior maxilla or mandible, and delayed tooth eruption in the affected region.
Ameloblastic ﬁbro-odontoma is classified into benign tumors with odontogenic epithelium with odontogenic ectomesenchyme, with or without hard tissue formation according to the 2005 WHO classification of odontogenic tumors.
The tumor contains soft and hard tissue components, which resemble dental papilla and foci of enamel and dentin, respectively.
Ameloblastic fibro-odontoma is usually a well-defined unilocular radiolucent mass having a variable amount of radiopaque material within it and is associated with the crown of an unerupted tooth/teeth.
Conservative surgical enucleation is the treatment of choice in well defined non-aggressive lesions.
However, in destructive lesions, surgical resection with partial maxillectomy or partial mandibulectomy may be required.
Recurrence is uncommon but can occur as a result of inadequate surgical removal.

Ameloblastic fibromas appear as unilocular lucent mandibular lesions, most frequently in the posterior mandible, and are usually associated with impacted teeth, centered on the unerupted crown.
They, therefore, appear very similar to unilocular ameloblastomas.
They are composed of enamel and embryonic connective tissue.

Ameloblastomas are locally aggressive benign tumors that arise from the mandible, or, less commonly, from the maxilla.
Usually present as a slowly but continuously growing hard painless lesion near the angle of the mandible in the 3rd to 5th decades of life, which can be severely disfiguring if left untreated.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe most common form of ameloblastoma - the multicystic form - was formerly known as adamantinoma of the jaw.
However, ameloblastoma is unrelated histologically to adamantinoma of the bone, and this terminology should be abandoned to avoid confusion.
Ameloblastomas are the second most common odontogenic tumor (odontoma is the most common overall, but ameloblastoma is the most common lucent lesion) and account for up to one-third of such cases.
They are slow-growing and tend to present in the 3rd to 5th decades of life, with no gender predilection 4.Ameloblastomas typically occur as hard, painless lesions near the angle of the mandible in the region of the 3rd molar tooth (48 and 38) although they can occur anywhere along the alveolus of the mandible (80%) and maxilla (20%).
When the maxilla is involved, the tumor is located in the premolar region and can extend up into the maxillary sinus.
Although benign, it is a locally aggressive neoplasm with a high rate of recurrence.
Approximately 20% of cases are associated with dentigerous cysts and unerupted teeth.
Unsurprisingly, ameloblastomas arise from ameloblasts, which are part of the odontogenic epithelium, responsible for enamel production and eventual crown formation.
Four forms have been described in the literature: unicystic, solid (multicystic), desmoplastic, and peripheral (extraosseous).There are no specific histological features to differentiate between ameloblastomas and craniopharyngiomas, with only location differentiating between two tumors 6.
Nonetheless, there are histological features of craniopharyngiomas not generally encountered with ameloblastomas, such as irregular calcified masses and foci of metaplastic bone or cartilage 8.Multicystic ameloblastomas account for 80-90% of cases which are classically expansile "soap-bubble" lesions, with well-demarcated borders and no matrix calcification.
Resorption of adjacent teeth and “root blunting” is often a feature.
When larger it may also erode through the cortex into adjacent soft tissues.
Unicystic ameloblastomas are well-demarcated unilocular lesions that are often pericoronal in position.
These are commonly found in the posterior mandible, particularly at the molars.
They are indistinguishable from other unilocular pericoronal lesions, such as dentigerous cysts, ameloblastic fibromas and odontogenic keratocysts on CT.In general, ameloblastomas demonstrate a mixed solid and cystic pattern, with a thick irregular wall, often with solid papillary structures projecting into the lesion.
These components tend to enhance vividly which is very helpful to distinguish them from other lucent lesions of the mandible.
Ameloblastomas tend to be treated by surgical en-bloc resection.
Local curettage is associated with a high rate of local recurrence (45-90%).Simple unilocular lesions are less common but have a better prognosis and can be treated by enucleation:simple (no nodule) variant will not be diagnosable on radiography, as it will be indistinguishable from other more common cystsluminal variant has a single nodule projecting into the cystmural variant has multiple nodules (often only microscopic) in the wall of the cyst.
The latter has an elevated risk of recurrenceMalignant behavior is seen in two forms 5:frankly malignant histologymetastases despite well-differentiated 'benign' histologyGeneral imaging differential considerations include:dentigerous cyst: the relationship between ameloblastomas and dentigerous cysts is a controversial one; 20% of ameloblastomas are thought to arise from pre-existing dentigerous cystsodontogenic keratocyst (OKC): usually unilocular with thin poorly enhancing wallsodontogenic myxoma: can be almost indistinguishableaneurysmal bone cyst (ABC)fibrous dysplasiagiant cell reparative cysts/granulomas

The American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons classification of periprosthetic hip fractures divides the femur into three separate regions:level I: proximal femur distally to the lower extent of the lesser trochanter level II: 10 cm of femur distal to level I level III: femur distal to level II Fractures are classified accordingly:type I: fractures proximal to the intertrochanteric line; usually occur during dislocation of the hiptype II: vertical or spiral fractures that do not extend past lower extent of the lesser trochantertype III: vertical or spiral fractures that extend past lower extent of lesser trochanter, but not beyond level II; usually at the junction of middle and distal thirds of the femoral stemtype IV: fractures that traverse femoral stem in level III or lie within that areatype IV-A: spiral fractures around the tip of the stemtype IV-B: simple transverse or short oblique fractures type V: severely comminuted fractures around the stem in level III type VI: fractures distal to the tip of the stem in level IIItype IV-A: spiral fractures around the tip of the stemtype IV-B: simple transverse or short oblique fractures periprosthetic fractureperiprosthetic hip fracture classification systems

The American Board of Radiology (ABR) is a national certifying board for radiologists in the United States of America.
It is a member of the American Board of Specialties.
The ABR currently requires two examinations for certification:core examcertifying examThe American Board of Radiology was founded in 1934 and is headquartered in Tucson, Arizona.
The ABR and the American College of Radiology (ACR) are separate and independent organizations.
The College does not certify radiologists.

The American Dental Association Universal Numbering System is a tooth notation system primarily used in the United States.
Teeth are numbered from the viewpoint of the dental practitioner looking into the open mouth, clockwise starting from the distalmost right maxillary teeth.
Permanent teethPrimary teethSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresRight maxillary1: third molar (wisdom tooth)2: second molar (12-year molar)3: first molar (6-year molar)4: second premolar (bicuspid)5: first premolar (bicuspid)6: canine (cuspid)7: lateral incisor8: central incisorLeft maxillary9: central incisor10: lateral incisor11: canine (cuspid)12: first premolar (bicuspid)13: second premolar (bicuspid)14: first molar (6-year molar)15: second molar (12-year molar)16: third molar (wisdom tooth)Left mandibular17: third molar (wisdom tooth)18: second molar (12-year molar)19: first molar (6-year molar)20: second premolar (bicuspid)21: first premolar (bicuspid)22: canine (cuspid)23: lateral incisor24: central incisorRight mandibular25: central incisor26: lateral incisor27: canine (cuspid)28: first premolar (bicuspid)29: second premolar (bicuspid)30: first molar (6-year molar)31: second molar (12-year molar)32: third molar (wisdom tooth)Right maxillaryA: second molarB: first molarC: canineD: lateral incisorE: central incisorLeft maxillaryF: central incisorG: lateral incisorH: canineI: first molarJ: second molarLeft mandibularK: second molarL: first molarM: canineN: lateral incisorO: central incisorRight mandibularP: central incisorQ: lateral incisorR: canineS: first molarT: second molarFédération Dentaire Internationale (FDI) notation, used in the rest of the world

The American College of Radiology (ACR) publishes and updates imaging guidelines, sometimes in collaboration with other bodies, on a range of imaging pathologies and reporting issues:adrenal incidentalomas: white paperbreast lesions: BI-RADShead and neck cancer: NI-RADSliver lesions: LI-RADSlung nodules: Lung-RADSmediastinal incidentalomas: white paperprostate lesions: PI-RADSthyroid nodules: TI-RADS

The American College of Radiology (ACR) was founded in 1923 by Albert Soiland, an American radiologist 2.
Its contemporary core purpose, according to its website, is "To serve patients and society by empowering members to advance the practice, science and professions of radiological care" 1.HistoryLeadershipOrganizationJournalsMembershipSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesIn 1923, a bill was passed by politicians in California allowing lay individuals to set-up and run x-ray centers.
This development greatly alarmed Albert Soiland (1873-1946), a pioneering radiologist working in Les Angeles.
He felt that the time had come for radiology to be recognized as a bona fide medical specialty in the United States.
Thus on the morning of June 26th 1923, he advanced a resolution at the House of Delegates of the American Medical Association (AMA) for radiology to be officially endorsed as a specialty and for a Section on Radiology to be established.
The AMA duly promulgated radiology as a specialty, although it took until 1924 for the Section to be set-up 2.On the evening of the same day, Soiland had dinner with twenty leading radiology colleagues.
He proposed that a College of Radiology be founded, something with which his radiology dinner companions concurred.
The American College of Radiology was incorporated in 1924.Current Chair of the Board of Chancellors is Geraldine McGinty, the first female radiologist to hold this position.
The College is organized into 54 chapters (50 states, Washington DC, Canada, and the Council of Affiliated Regional Radiation Oncology Societies (CARROS)).ACR bulletinJACR (Journal of American College of Radiology)first published January 2004 4first published January 2004 4Currently over 38,000, including radiologists, radiation oncologists, nuclear medicine physicians and medical physicists 1.American Board of Radiology (ABR)American Roentgen Ray Society (ARRS)Radiological Society of North America (RSNA)

American Journal of Neuroradiology (AJNR) is the premier publication of the American Society of Neuroradiology and was first published in 1980.
Its founding editor was Juan M Taveras (1919-2002), the pioneering American neuroradiologist, who was a co-founder of the American Society of Neuroradiology.
It is published monthly.
In 2011, at the behest of Mauricio Castillo, Editor of Chief of AJNR, a new review journal, Neurographics, was published, initially quarterly, now bimonthly, by the American Society of Neuroradiology.
Its current (and founding) Editor-in-Chief is Barton F Branstetter IV 5.The current, and sixth, Editor-in-Chief is Jeffrey S Ross, who has been at the helm since 2016.The Editor-in-Chief serves an eight year term.*resigned due to becoming Dean of the School of Medicine and Chief Executive Officer of the NYU Hospitals 3American Journal of Roentgenology (AJR)RadioGraphics

The American Journal of Roentgenology, also known as AJR, is a peer-reviewed monthly journal published by the American Roentgen Ray Society (ARRS).
Its current editor in chief is Dr Thomas H Berquist.
Its global circulation is close to 25,000 paying subscribers 16.
Journal titleHistoryEditorsSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesLike many of the more long-lived academic publications, there have been a number of name changes over the years (see below).
Some non-North American radiologists think that AJR stands for the American Journal of Radiology; however, it has always been short for the American Journal of Roentgenology, or a close variant of this.
There were discussions about officially renaming AJR as the American Journal of Radiology in the mid-1970s but it was decided that the original name had important historical connotations and it was left alone.
Indeed there has never been a scientific publication with the title American Journal of Radiology (cf.
British Journal of Radiology).
An open-access online-only journal called the American Journal of Radiology and Imaging was founded in 2018 and has no relationship with the ARRS or AJR.For many years it has been informally and affectionately known within the radiology community as the yellow journal due to the color of its cover 13.
However, in cross-specialty discussions some caution is needed as other scientific publications share the same colored sobriquet, e.g. The Journal of the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons is also known by its readership as the yellow journal 15.The American Roentgen Ray Society (ARRS) was founded in 1900 by a small coterie of physicians convened by Dr Heber Robarts (1852-1922) 5 in St Louis, Missouri.
Dr Robarts already published The American X-Ray Journal, which was first published in 1897.
Despite this in 1902, the new Society started a brand new publication, the Transactions of the American Roentgen Ray Society which in its first issue carried the full text of papers presented at its third annual meeting.
This annual journal contained reports from the committees of the ARRS, minutes from official meetings and presented papers from their scientific meetings.
It rapidly became apparent that an annual publication would not suffice for the rapid growth in all the radiological research taking place.
Therefore it was replaced by a new journal the American Quarterly of Roentgenology which first appeared in 1907.
Its first editor was Dr Preston Manasseh Hickey (1865-1930) 2.
After several years quarterly publication was not frequent enough to adequately meet the needs of the expanding radiological community.
Therefore in 1913 it became a monthly publication and was renamed the American Journal of Roentgenology (AJR).
Dr Hickey resigned in 1916 after a decade at the helm.
He was succeeded by Dr James Thomas Case (1882-1960) 3,11, but he was the only editor for two years as in 1918 he was conscripted to the war effort.
It later transpired that for much of Dr Case's editorship the work was performed by one of his clinical colleagues, Dr Augustus Crane (1868-1937) 4, who was editor, in all but name, from 1917 to 1918.In 1916 the American Radium Society was founded.
Dr Harry Miles Imboden (1878-1951) 10 was editor from 1918-1923 and in 1922 it was agreed that the American Journal of Roentgenology would also be the official journal for the American Radium Society; therefore it was renamed the American Journal of Roentgenology and Radium Therapy.
Dr Imboden was succeeded in 1923 by Dr Arthur Carlisle Christie (1879-1956) 9 who served for 7 years.
He increased the number of annual volumes from one to two, in a stroke doubling the number of papers published by AJR.
He also increased the number of abstracts from other journals including for the first time, abstracts from non-imaging journals, that might nevertheless be of interest to the radiology readership.
Dr Lawrence Reynolds (1889-1961) 6 became editor in 1930 and his 31-year tenure has been the longest to date.
There was some controversy during his editorship due to his accepting up to 85% of submitted papers [cf.
35% in 1988].
This created a huge backlog.
However, Dr Reynolds also oversaw a huge rise in subscriptions such that the AJR had the highest circulation of any radiology journal in the US at that time.
Dr Reynolds died in office in 1961 and, his colleague, Dr Traian Leucutia (1892-1977) 7 then assumed the editor's chair.
During Dr Leucutia's editorship, in the 1960s, nuclear medicine was emerging as an important new modality and the journal was renamed The American Journal of Roentgenology, Radium Therapy, and Nuclear Medicine.
In 1965 the number of published papers had again increased so much that each issue had become unreasonably large, and subsequently there was an increase to three annual volumes.
After Dr Leucutia relinquished the editorship in 1975, Dr E (Ernst) Frederick Lang (1916-2014) ref was acting editor for one year only.
In 1976 Dr Melvin Figley (1920-2010) 8 assumed the mantle of the editor.
The editorial office was moved to Seattle, after 45 years in Detroit.
For the first time the editors were remunerated for their role and associate editors were appointed.
The output of papers from the American Radium Society slowed to a trickle by the mid-1970s and therefore the official linkage between it and the AJR was concluded in 1977.
The journal changed its name back to the American Journal of Roentgenology in 1976.
Some advocated updating the title to the American Journal of Radiology but it was decided to maintain its historical associations by retaining "Roentgenology" in the title.
Mandatory peer review was also introduced during Dr Figley's time in charge.
Dr Figley was also key in an agreement between the AJR and the American Society of Neuroradiology (ASNR) leading to the founding of the American Journal of Neuroradiology (AJNR) which first appeared in 1980.
Dr Robert Norton Berk (1930-2017) assumed the mantle of editor in 1986, holding the position for ten years.
He is remembered for the efficiency of his editorial office: especially his computerization of the editorial office.
He is also fondly remembered for creating the Melvin M. Figley Fellowship in Radiology Journalism, which is awarded annually to aspiring academic radiologists.
The Fellow spends a month in the editorial office working closely with the editor and his staff and learning about radiology journalism firsthand.
In 1986 the audited circulation was 20,000, but had increased to 30,000 by the time he retired in 1995; this 50% increase in subscribed readership has been put down largely to Dr Berk's tireless editorial efforts 12.
Dr Berk launched the first electronic version of AJR in 1995 with Dr Beverly P Wood (fl.
2019), a Californian pediatric radiologist as its first editor 12,18.At the end of 1995 Dr Berk retired as editor with Dr Lee F Rogers (fl.
2019) replacing him in the editor's chair.
Dr Rogers introduced two new monthly columns: a medicolegal column authored by Dr Leonard Berlin (fl.
2019) and an Editor's notebook giving the editor the opportunity to expound on a topic of his choosing 13.In 2004 Dr Bob (Robert) J Stanley (fl.
2019) became the editor 14.
Dr Stanley's key contribution in his four years in office was expanding the journal's online presence.
He introduced electronic submission and peer-review of articles, with subsequent marked improvement in turn around time for new submissions.
Web-based submissions resulted in a large increase in international submissions and the journal had to significantly increase its pool of international peer reviewers.
Abridged Chinese and Japanese versions of AJR were also published for the first time during his tenure 14.Towards the end of 2008, Dr Stanley announced his retirement from AJR and subsequently Dr Thomas H Berquist became the twelfth editor in January 2009.
It was announced in August 2018 that Dr Berquist would stand down as editor in June 2020.
His successor has not yet been chosen 19.American Roentgen Ray SocietyBJRRadiologyRadioGraphics

The American Roentgen Ray Society (ARRS) is the first and oldest learned society for radiologists in the United States, it was founded in 1900.
Its current President is Philip Costello.
Immediate past President: Bernard F King, Jr.
ARRS publishes the peer-reviewed journal American Journal of Roentgenology (AJR).
Its current editor is Thomas H Berquist.

American Society of Neuroradiology (ASNR) was established in 1962 to ensure that neuroradiologists in the United States could freely exchange ideas and act with a common voice.
It publishes the American Journal of Neuroradiology (AJNR).At the VIth Symposium Neuroradiologicum held in Rome in 1960, Juan M Taveras (1919-2002) 2 was awarded the Presidency of the VIIth Symposium, to be held for the first time in the United States, in New York in 1964.
Dr Taveras was Director of Neuroradiology at the Neurological Institute of Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in New York City.
Dr Taveras was keen to found a formal learned society to bring together American neuroradiologists, and he sent invites out for a meeting over dinner at Keen's English Chop House in New York for the night of April 19th 1962.
His fourteen invitees encompassed a small group of full-time practising neuroradiologists from around the US.
The foundations of the American Society of Neuroradiology were established at this dinner.
Its first President was to be Juan Taveras, the unanimous choice of those in attendance that evening.

The American X-Ray Journal was the first radiology journal in the United States.
Its first issue was published in May 1897, its founder and first editor was an American physician Heber Robarts (1852-1922), who took an early keen interest in the new Roentgen rays.
In its earliest days the journal struggled to attract any important articles as the majority of the pioneering researchers in the fledgling field of x-rays would prefer to see their work published in the established medical journals.
The initial subscription rate for the new journal was one dollar per annum (payable in advance) or two dollars for overseas subscribers.
Alternatively, it was ten cents per issue, or twenty cents for readers outside the US.
In 1902, Harry Preston Pratt, an American physician from Chicago with an interest in electrotherapy, purchased the American X-Ray Journal from Dr Robarts.
In 1904, the American X-Ray Journal subsumed the Archives of Electrology and Radiology (which had previously been the American Electro-Therapeutic and X-Ray Era).
Following this, the journal was re-named and re-focused as the American Journal of Progressive Therapeutics, and this published its last edition in January 1906.

Amino acids are the monomeric building blocks of proteins.
Amino acids concatenate into chains, which are arbitrarily divided into peptides, polypeptides, or proteins according to chain length.
Generally, chains of 10 or fewer amino acids are deemed to be peptides, chain length from 10-100 are polypeptides, and greater than ~100 amino acids are called proteins.
StructureList of amino acidsRadiolabeled amino acidsRelated articlesReferencesAll amino acids (except proline) consist of a carboxl (-COOH) group and an amino (-NH2) group, with varying side chains.
Proline is chemically strictly an imino acid, which have an imino (>C=NH) group, instead of an amino group, although for biological usage it is counted as an amino acid.
Essential amino acids cannot be synthesized by the cells, and therefore must be obtained from the diet.
Conversely the non-essential amino acids can be made by the body and therefore are not mandatory constituents of a balanced diet.
The list of amino acids has the full name of the amino acid, and in parentheses the standard three letter code and single letter code.valine (Val, V)leucine (Leu, L)isoleucine (Ile, I)threonine (Thr, T)methionine (Met, M)phenylalanine (Phe, F)tryptophan (Trp, W) lysine (Lys, K)histidine (His, H)glycine (Gly, G)alanine (Ala, A)serine (Ser, S)cysteine (Cys, C)tyrosine (Tyr, Y)aspartic acid (Asp, D)asparagine (Asn, N)glutamine (Gln, Q)glutamic acid (Glu, E)proline (Pro, P)arginine (Arg, R)selenocysteine (Sec, U)Some amino acids can be labeled with radioactive isotopes for use in nuclear medicine 3-4.
Methionine, for example, labeled with carbon-11 can be used in the study of tumors of the central nervous system 5-7.
One more example: 18F-DOPA, an intermediate amino acid in the biosynthetic pathway of dopamine, labeled with fluorine-18 is used in the study of the Parkinson's disease 8-10.

Amiodarone hepatotoxicity is one of the complications that can occur with amiodarone therapy.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIn the majority of patients, it is discovered incidentally during routine testing of liver biochemistry and rarely do the hepatic effects develop into symptomatic liver injury or failure 1-5.
While being non-specific, increased hepatic attenuation has been described as one of the effects of amiodarone on the liver 2,3.
This however may not necessarily imply hepatotoxicity.
There is no published literature showing that dronedarone, a synthetic derivative of amiodarone, produces similar CT appearances.
This is likely due to the absence of the iodine moieties in the dronedarone molecule.
Nevertheless dronedarone can produce severe hepatotoxicity 6.amiodarone lung

13NH3 is a PET tracer used for studies of myocardial perfusion imaging.
It is produced in a cyclotron by proton irradiation of the enriched water of the oxygen-16.
Ammonia (N-13) is administered intravenously, at a dose of 10-20 mCi (370-740 Mbq) in adults; its physical half-life is 10 minutes.
Ammonia, at physiological pH, is found in its cationic form, 13NH4+ (ammonium ion); it is, therefore, probable that it passes the cell membrane of the myocyte through the sodium-potassium pump active transport mechanism.
Inside the cell, it is then converted, together with glutamic acid, into glutamine (N-13).

Amiodarone lung is an interstitial lung disease seen in patients being administered amiodarone and can manifest in a number of histopathologic patterns.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresThe reported prevalence of pulmonary toxicity in patients receiving amiodarone is ~10% (range 2-18%) 8.Patients are usually elderly and have been exposed to amiodarone, usually for at least six months, although there is a poor correlation with dosage or cumulative dose.
Risk factors include 6:treatment longer than two monthsage over 60 yearsdaily dose >400 mgantecedent lung disease or surgeryprior angiographic investigationsOverall pulmonary toxicity occurs in 5-10% of treated patients 4-6.Patients typically present with exertional dyspnea as the dominant symptom.
Low-grade fever, anorexia, muscle weakness have also been reported 2.
In approximately a third of patients, the presentation may mimic pulmonary infection 6.Respiratory function tests are usually abnormal with a restrictive pattern on spirometry and decreased gas transfer 2,6.
Hypoxemia is almost always present 6.In some cases, tissue diagnosis is required to establish the diagnosis, although usually, the combination of appropriate clinical history and radiographic features suffice to guide therapy.
Amiodarone hydrochloride is a triiodinated antiarrhythmic, comprised of 37% iodine by weight, which accumulates in type II pneumocytes 5,7.
As is the case with other drug-induced pulmonary toxicity, amiodarone can cause a variety of histopathologic patterns including 6-7:chronic interstitial pneumonia: most commonorganizing pneumonia (OP)diffuse alveolar damage (DAD): AIP and even ARDSA distinctive feature of amiodarone lung is the presence of foamy histiocytes which contain intracytoplasmic osmiophilic lamellar bodies.
However, this feature is also seen in patients with amiodarone exposure and no evidence of toxicity.
There are two main patterns of involvement, which may co-exist.
Appearances on chest radiography are non-specific, typically consisting of:peripheral areas of consolidationupper lobe predominanceunderlying interstitial diseaseAs with other pulmonary diseases with an interstitial component, HRCT is the modality of choice.
Changes are usually bilateral, asymmetrical and particularly prominent in the lung bases 6.
Findings include:areas of consolidationperipheraloften hyperdense 1,6 c.f.
muscle (on account of the iodine)patchy ground-glass opacitiesco-existing interstitial diseasereticulonodular opacitiesperipheraloften hyperdense 1,6 c.f.
muscle (on account of the iodine)reticulonodular opacitiesIn addition, the liver (80% of cases) and sometimes the heart (20%) are high density 6.
However, high hepatic and splenic attenuation is also seen in patients exposed to amiodarone in the absence of drug toxicity.
gallium-67 scan: sensitive but nonspecificgallium-67 scan: sensitive but nonspecificCessation of amiodarone and treatment with steroids arrests and often results in resolution of imaging findings over time 3.
Overall mortality from amiodarone lung is <10% 6.Imaging differential considerations include:pulmonary eosinophiliapatients with amiodarone lung have normal blood and tissue eosinophil counts 2also peripheral distributionpulmonary tuberculosis: cavitation commonpulmonary fibrosis from other causesChurg-Strauss syndromeother hyperattenuating pulmonary abnormalities 3patients with amiodarone lung have normal blood and tissue eosinophil counts 2also peripheral distribution

Amniocentesis, also known as amniotic fluid testing or AFT, is a diagnostic or therapeutic medical procedure primarily used in prenatal diagnosis of chromosomal abnormalities and fetal infections.
A small amount of amniotic fluid (15-20 ml), which contains fetal tissue, is extracted from the amniotic sac surrounding a developing fetus, and the fetal DNA is examined for genetic abnormalities.
It is usually performed under ultrasound guidance and is performed between the 15th-20th week of pregnancy.
If performed after 20 weeks it is often termed a late amniocentesis.prenatal genetic studiesassessment of fetal lung maturityTORCH infection or chorioamnionitis hemoglobinopathies and degree of hemolytic anemiablood or platelet typeneural tube defectstherapeutic amniocentesis: to remove excess amniotic fluid in symptomatic polyhydramnios or twin-to-twin transfusion syndromeinfection or injury to the fetusmiscarriage: pregnancy loss ~1% 2leakage of amniotic fluid: 1-2% 2chorioamniotic separationvaginal bleedingchorionic villus samplingtherapeutic amniocentesis

An amnioreduction is a procedure where an amniocentesis is performed for intentional reduction of amniotic fluid volume.
This is sometimes performed in the context of extreme polyhydramnios (particularly in the recipient twin in twin to twin transfusion syndrome).

Amniotic band syndrome (ABS) comprises of a wide spectrum of abnormalities, all of which result from entrapment of various fetal body parts in a disrupted amnion.
Due to the randomness of entrapment, each affected individual has the potential to form a unique deficit.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThe phenomenon is estimated to occur in ~1:1200-1300 live births 1,8.The exact pathogenesis is not well known, although several etiologies have been proposed.
Proposed by Torpin in 1965 10, it is still the most widely accepted theory.
A disruption in the amnion allows the embryo or fetus to enter the chorionic cavity, where body parts become entangled in fibrous mesodermic strands emanating from the chorionic side of the amnion.
If occurring early in gestation, this can potentially cause multiple malformations.
Proposes that a vascular insult during early embryogenesis is responsible for amniotic band syndrome 4.The vast majority of cases have a sporadic occurrence 8.
In rare situations, it may  be associated with:Ehlers-Danlos syndrome epidermolysis bullosaThere is a massive spectrum of abnormalities, depending on which part becomes entrapped and at what stage of gestation.
Features are often asymmetrical.
Observable features according to location include:acraniaanencephalyfacial clefts nasal deformitiesasymmetric microphthalmosabdominal wall defectsrib cleftingcongenital scoliosisambiguous genitaliaimperforate anusLimb defects tend to be the commonest 7:variable levels of limb amputationvariable levels of limb constriction, with possible distal atrophylymphedema distal to the level of the band constrictionpseudosyndactylyclubfootphocomelia 2In addition to these defects, actual background amniotic bands may also be detected on antenatal ultrasound.
The prognosis is extremely variable, depending on the part that becomes entrapped.
This can range from normal life expectancy at one extreme in the case of a minor distal limb entrapment to in-utero demise in the case of anencephaly from head entrapment.
There is no recognized risk of recurrence for future pregnancies.
The differential is extremely variable, depending on the type of deficit.limb body wall complex

Amnion refers to a membranous structure which covers and protects the embryo.
It forms inside the chorion.
The amnion usually fuses with the outer chorion by around 14 weeks of gestation.
Radiographic featuresHistory and etymologySee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe amnion can be visualized in most pregnancies before the 12th week of gestation and appears as a thin membrane separating the amniotic cavity, which contains the fetus, from the extra-embryonic coelom and the secondary yolk sac 1.The amniotic sac-embryo-yolk sac complex can be seen as two small blebs of almost equal size attached to the wall of the early gestational sac which is called the double bleb sign 2.The cavity contained within the amnion is termed the amniotic cavity.
Between 6.5 to 10 weeks of gestation, the length of the amniotic cavity is similar to that of the embryo 3."Amnion" derives from the Greek word "άμνίον", a bowl in which sacrificial blood of sheep was caught, which in turn derives from "άμνός", meaning "lamb".
This is thought to be because fetal membranes were first described in sheep.
The term was originally used for fetal membranes in general by Empedocles, whereas J Pollux was the first to use it to specifically refer to the amniotic membrane 5.amniocentesischorioamnionitischorio-amniotic seperationempty amnion signexpanded amnion sign

An amniotic fluid discordance is usually defined as a difference in amniotic fluid volumes in a twin pregnancy.
It is a predictor of poor fetal outcome in twin pregnancy related complications.
Causes of amniotic fluid discordance include :twin-twin transfusion syndromeplacental insufficiencyintrauterine infectioncongenital (e.g. renal agenesis in one twin)premature rupture of membranes in one of the twins (in MCDA / DCDA pregnancies)discordant fetal growthdisparate fetal growth

Amniotic bands refer to free floating blind ending amnion with an intact chorionic membrane.
In certain situations, they lead to the amniotic band syndrome.
They should not be confused with amniotic shelves which refer to the presence of amnion folding around pre-existing uterine adhesions.
Some advocate fetoscopic release of amniotic bands in selected cases 1-3.intrauterine membrane in pregnancyamniotic band syndrome

Amniotic fluid embolism is a special type of pulmonary embolism where the embolus is comprised of amniotic fluid.
It can be a highly fatal complication of pregnancy, with an 80% maternal mortality rate.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresHistory and etymologyReferencesIt is thought to complicate 1/8000-80,000 pregnancies.
The classic clinical presentation is of abrupt dyspnea, cyanosis, and shock, shortly followed by a cardiorespiratory arrest and severe pulmonary edema.
Some patients may present with an anaphylactic reaction caused by a hypersensitivity to the leukotrienes and arachnoid metabolites present in amniotic fluid.
Central nervous system irritability producing convulsions is also considered a typical feature.
It occurs when amniotic fluid is forced into the bloodstream through small tears in uterine veins during normal labor.
However, in some cases, the placenta is disrupted by surgery or trauma.approximately 40% of patients may suffer a consumptive coagulopathy 2Non-specific but may have diffuse bilateral heterogeneous and homogeneous areas of increased opacity (can be indistinguishable from acute pulmonary edema due to other causes).Chest CT may show diffuse ground glass opacities (similar to early stage of acute respiratory distress syndrome) and prominent hilar pulmonary vasculature 9.
CT findings are also not specific and difficult to distinguish from other causes of acute noncardiogenic or cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
It was first reported by Ricardo Meyer in 1926 6.

Amniotic fluid in the first trimester has been estimated from weeks 7-12.
Although the amniotic fluid index (AFI) is calculated in the second trimester, one can get an idea of whether the amount of amniotic fluid is too much or too little at an earlier time point.
The amniotic fluid volume is related to, but different than the mean sac diameter.
The mean sac diameter is the measurement of the gestational sac, which included the amniotic sac.
Although the first trimester amniotic fluid volume is not currently one of the criteria for pregnancy failure, an abnormal amount of fluid may indicate a poor outcome.
A difference between mean gestational sac diameter and crown-rump length of <5 mm is suspicious for, but not diagnostic of early pregnancy failure.
Estimated amniotic fluid volume (mean +/- standard deviation) 2week 7: 1.0 ml +/- 1.4week 8: 2.9 ml +/- 1.4week 9: 7.2 ml +/- 4.0week 10: 24.7 ml +/- 9.5week 11: 45.4 ml +/- 12.6week 12: 80.6 ml +/- 12.3This is different than the gestational sac volume  2week 7: 8.3 ml +/- 4.3week 8: 16.2 ml +/- 6.8week 9: 26.0 ml +/- 10.8week 10: 47.1 ml +/- 19.6week 11: 67.9 ml +/- 20.9week 12: 90.8 ml +/- 14.3

The amniotic fluid index (AFI) is an estimate of the amniotic fluid volume in a pregnant uterus.
It is part of the fetal biophysical profile.
the uterus is divided into four imaginary quadrants with the linea nigra and a mediolateral line running through the umbilicus acting as the vertical and the horizontal axes respectivelythe deepest pocket devoid of an umbilical cord and fetal parts is measured in the vertical dimensionmeasurement of the four pockets is in centimetersthe sum of all the four quadrant measurements is the AFInormal AFI values range from 5 to 25 cm The normal range for amniotic fluid volumes varies with gestational age.
Typical values include:AFI between 5-25 cm is considered normal; median AFI level is ~14 cm from week 20 to week 35, after which the amniotic fluid volume begins to reduceAFI <5 cm is considered to be oligohydramniosvalue changes with age: the 5th percentile for gestational ages is most often taken as the cut-off value, and this is around an AFI of 7 cm for second and third-trimester pregnancies; an AFI of 5 cm is two standard deviations from the meanAFI >25 cm is considered to be polyhydramniosvalue changes with age: the 5th percentile for gestational ages is most often taken as the cut-off value, and this is around an AFI of 7 cm for second and third-trimester pregnancies; an AFI of 5 cm is two standard deviations from the mean

Amniotic fluid volume (AFV) is a function both of the amount of water transferred to the gestation across the placental membrane, and the flux of water across the amnion.
PhysiologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesThe AFV undergoes characteristic changes with gestation.
It progressively rises.10 weeks gestation: ~10-20 mL16 weeks gestation:  ~250 mL33 weeks gestation: ~800 mL  38-39 weeks: plateaus at ~1000 mL  finally decreases at 40 weeks to ~800 mL At 8 weeks the volume increases by ~10 mL/week, at 13 weeks the AFV increases by 25 mL/week and reaches a maximum rate of 60 mL/week at 21 weeks gestation.
The weekly volume increment then decreases and reaches zero at about 33 weeks of gestation at which point the mean AFV reaches its peak.
After this point, the amniotic fluid volume declines at a rate of ~8% per week.
During the first half of pregnancy, the amniotic fluid volume is closely correlated with fetal weight.
The ratio of amniotic fluid to fetal volume increases until about 30 weeks of gestation and then appears to decline.
Ultrasound is the modality of choice of assessing amniotic fluid volumes.
The AFV can be assessed by ultrasound by using three main indirect parameters:single deepest (maximum vertical) pocket methodamniotic fluid indextwo diameter pocket methodpolyhydramniosoligohydramniosamniotic fluid discordance

Amoebic colitis is a type of infectious colitis, more common in tropical and subtropical areas.
The causative agent is the trophozoite form of the protozoan Entamoeba histolytica.
In most cases of transmission, the cyst form lives in the colon as a commensal and patients remain asymptomatic.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresAmoebic colitis presents with abdominal pain and dysentery.
Colonic manifestations comprise a spectrum of disease, including 1,2:acute proctocolitis (dysentery)perianal ulcerationfulminant colitis leading to colonic wall perforationtoxic megacolonchronic (nondysenteric) colitisamebomaappearances of infectious colitis on CT are variable and nonspecificamoebic colitis may present with ulceration and skip lesions, mimicking Crohn diseasecollar button or aphthous ulcersameboma: large lesions mimicking a tumorany part of the colon may be involved, but typically the cecum and rectum are more severely affecteda coexisting liver abscess may be seenthe ileum is spared; helps to differentiate it from Crohn or tuberculosis, which typically involve the terminal ileuma coexisting liver abscess may be seenAntiparasitic therapy for amoebic colitis requires confirmation with laboratory investigation, including a fecal exam.bowel perforationextraintestinal disease, including amoebic liver abscess (most common), brain abscess, peritonitis, pleuropulmonary and/or genitourinary disease, and pericarditis 1other infectious colitides (e.g. Yersinia, Clostridioides difficile)ileocecal tuberculosisischemic colitisinflammatory bowel disease

Amniotic shelf (also known as an amniotic sheet 4) refers to a sheet like projection that can result from uterine synechiae that has been encompassed by the expanding chorion and amnion.
In contrast to amniotic bands, they are not thought to be associated with any fetal deformity.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresComplicationsPrognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesThe estimated prevalence is at around 0.45-0.47% of pregnancies 5.They are composed of four distinct layers: two layers of chorion sandwiched between two layers of amnion.
They may be are seen as shelf like thick bands and communicating along its entire length with the uterine wall, thus having a  base and a free edge.
Color Doppler may demonstrate flow within the band.
When large they can result in abnormal fetal presentations (e.g breech presentation) due to reduced fetal movement by compartmentalizing amniotic fluid 5.Most amniotic sheets are considered benign (especially if they are incomplete 2).
But there is some evidence that complete amniotic sheets may be associated with adverse fetal outcome2.
Some authors suggest that perpendicular, in contrast to non-perpendicular, amniotic sheets are more commonly associated with a breech presentation at term 3.If adjacent to the placenta on ultrasound consider:circumvallate placentaintrauterine membrane in pregnancy

Amoebic hepatic abscesses are a form of hepatic abscess resulting from Entamoeba histolytica infection.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisPractical pointsReferencesCases and figuresHepatic abscess is the most common extraintestinal form of E. histolytica infection 6.Although the causative pathogen is found worldwide, it is endemic to the Middle East and Eastern Asia and travel history should always be sought in suspected cases.
It has a strong male predominance, about 10:1 6.
Patients may experience general malaise, presenting with frank sepsis and right upper quadrant pain.
Etiology of the abscess can be inferred based on 6:identification of E. histolytica specific antigen or DNA in stool samplesantiamoebic antibodies in blood serum They can sometimes be difficult to differentiate from other liver abscesses.
They tend to be round or oval and be variable in size although most are around 2-6 cm in diameter.
An enhancing wall is present in most cases.
Other described features include:an incomplete rim of edemathe margin of the abscess tends to be smooth in around 60% of cases and nodular in around 40%internal septations: present in around 30% of casesfocal intrahepatic biliary dilatation peripheral to an abscess is an uncommon manifestationExtrahepatic pathology can be present in a considerable amount of patients, including:pleural effusionperihepatic fluid collectiongastric or colonic involvementretroperitoneal extensionMay appear as a hypoechoic lesion with low-level internal echoes and absence of significant wall echoes.
Usually appear as rounded, well-defined lesions with attenuation values that indicate the presence of complex fluid (e.g. 10–20 HU).
An enhancing wall and a peripheral zone of edema may be seen with wall thickness around 3-15 mm.
The central abscess cavity can show septations and/or fluid-debris levels.
Gas can be present within an abscess if there is a complicating hepatobronchial fistula or a hepatocolic fistula.
Described signal characteristics include:T1: generally homogeneous low signal intensity (signal homogeneity within the abscess can be present more often on T1- than on T2-weighted images 5)T2: generally homogeneous high signal intensity; perilesional edema may be seen in half of the casesManagement centers on initiating anti-parasitic agents, most commonly metronidazole which also treats amoebic dysentery 6.Traditionally, amoebic abscesses are treated with medical therapy as the first line as opposed to percutaneous or surgical drainage, which is the first line of treatment in pyogenic liver abscesses.
In practice, percutaneous drainage may frequently be required, particularly in:uncertain diagnosislarger abscesses which are at risk of spontaneous rupture into the peritoneal, pleural, or pericardial spacesfailed response to metronidazole therapy - proposed as persistent symptoms after 4 days 6amoebic abscesses may take up to 2 years to complete resolve on imaging; consequently, persistent imaging findings alone should not guide further management 6

Amorphous calcifications, previously known as indistinct calcifications, are a morphological descriptor for breast calcifications that are small and/or hazy such that no clearly defined shape/form can be ascribed.
PathologyRadiographic featuresRadiology reportRelated articlesReferencesMany benign and malignant conditions may be seen in association with these calcifications 1.benign: ~60%fibrocystic changefibroadenomasclerosing adenosispapillomahigh risk lesions: ~20%atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH)atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH)lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)malignant: ~20% 1-2low grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)invasive ductal carcinoma ~10%: usually has an accompanying massfibrocystic changefibroadenomasclerosing adenosispapillomaatypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH)atypical lobular hyperplasia (ALH)lobular carcinoma in situ (LCIS)low grade ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS)invasive ductal carcinoma ~10%: usually has an accompanying massMagnification views as part of a diagnostic mammographic evaluation are required to fully assess these calcifications.
Amorphous calcifications are small (80-200 micrometer in diameter) and/or hazy/faint, such that a more specific morphologic descriptor cannot be assigned.
Given the 20% positive predictive value of malignancy, most amorphous calcifications are assessed as BI-RADS 4B (suspicious, warranting biopsy) 5.
That assessment particularly applies to amorphous calcifications with a grouped, linear, or segmental distribution.
However, bilateral diffuse amorphous calcifications may be assessed as BI-RADS 2 (benign).
If long-term (2-3 year) stability has been demonstrated, a BI-RADS 2 assessment would also be appropriate.
If the interpreting radiologist has sufficient personal experience with this finding to suggest <2% risk of malignancy to justify a watchful waiting approach, a BI-RADS 3 assessment may be entertained, but this approach is not supported by the literature 5.

Amphiarthroses are a functional class of joint that permit a small amount of movement under normal conditions.symphyses (secondary cartilaginous joints)symphysis pubisintervertebral discssternomanubrial joint symphysis pubisintervertebral discssternomanubrial joint synarthrosesdiarthroses

The ampulla of Vater is a conical structure at the confluence of the common bile duct (CBD) and the main pancreatic duct that protrudes at the major duodenal papilla into the medial aspect of the descending duodenum.
The entire structure is encased by smooth muscle fibers that compose the sphincter of Oddi 2.
It traverses a dehiscence of the duodenal wall and terminates at the major duodenal papilla.
Variant anatomyHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe confluence of the common bile and main pancreatic ducts can occur in three ways 1:a common duct (the ampulla of Vater) ~60% a “double-barreled” opening at the apex of the papilla ~38% separate duodenal openings for the two canals ~2% Named after Abraham Vater (1684-1751), a German professor of anatomy 5.
The eponymous terms for both the ampulla and the papilla can be replaced with anatomical terms such as hepatopancreatic or biliopancreatic ampulla and major or greater duodenal papilla, respectively 6.ampullary tumorsperi-ampullary tumors

Ampulla (plural: ampullae) is an anatomical term used for tubular structures with a short segmental bulbous dilatation:ampulla (fallopian tube)ampulla (lacrimal system)ampulla (esophagus)ampulla (rectum)ampulla (semicircular ducts)ampulla (spleen)ampulla of Vaterampulla (vas deferens)Ampulla is the Latin for a jug 1.

Ampullary adenocarcinomas are rare biliary tumors arising from the distal biliary epithelium at the ampulla of Vater.
Although classically presenting on imaging with the double duct sign, the tumor itself may be occult or of limited characterization imaging.
EpidemiologyClinical presentation Radiographic features Treatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresThese are rare tumors, with an adulthood estimated incidence of 0.70 cases out of 100.000 men and 0.45 cases out of 100.000 women in the United States 2.
These patients typically present with obstructive jaundice and abdominal pain, but presentation may be vague with other nonspecific symptoms.
US, CT, and MRI all demonstrate the double duct sign: simultaneous dilatation of the common bile and pancreatic ducts; seen in ~52% of cases 1.
may demonstrate a solid enhancing small tumor in the ampullary region protruding into the second portion of the duodenum 1lobulated or infiltrative margins have been described 1discrete tumors may not be visible 1,3CT IV Cholangiogram it is usually not performed given biliary obstruction and raised bilirubin levelsMRCP has been described as more sensitive than other imaging modalities for depicting ampullary lesions, but with low specificity though 3.
T2it may delineate the presence of an ampullary mass or papillary bulgingbesides the biliary tree dilatation, may show irregular narrowing of the distal common bile ductDWI/ADC: some degree of restricted diffusion help in differentiating from benign lesions 3it may delineate the presence of an ampullary mass or papillary bulgingbesides the biliary tree dilatation, may show irregular narrowing of the distal common bile ductTumors that are occult on imaging are also frequently occult at ERCP/endoscopy, with the diagnosis only achieved after papillotomy/biopsy 1.ampullary adenomapapillitispapillary stenosis (e.g. post-inflammatory)

Ampullary ectopic pregnancy is the commonest type of tubal ectopic pregnancy and accounts for ~70% of such cases.
According to one study the disruption of the tubal wall was less than as in isthmic ectopic pregnancy 2.

The term amputation refers to the disconnection of all or part of a limb from the body.
Specifically amputation is defined as removal of the structure through a bone.
This is in contrast to disarticulation, which is removal of the structure through a joint.
When due to trauma, traumatic amputation can be disastrous, severing vital structures.
Whereas surgical amputation is a controlled procedure that allows reconstruction of the stump (for function or use with prostheses thereafter).
Amputations can also be congenital.

The term ampullary tumor generally refers to either benign or malignant neoplasms that arise from the glandular epithelium of the ampulla of Vater, including 1:ampullary adenoma (adenoma of ampulla of Vater)ampullary carcinoma (carcinoma of ampulla of Vater)According to some authors, ampullary tumors are considered part of periampullary tumors 4.Treatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIn general, ampullary tumors tend to show a better prognosis than do their biliary or periampullary counterparts as they can be detected at an earlier stage owing to earlier presentation due to biliary obstruction 3.Considerampullary metastasispancreatic cancer​pancreatic adenocarcinoma​pancreatic adenocarcinoma

The Amsterdam criteria are used in the diagnosis hereditary non polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC).Initial description in 1991:> or equal to 3 relatives with colorectal cancer (CRC)> or equal to 1 case in a first degree relative> or equal to 2 successive generations should be affected> or equal to 1 tumor should be diagnosed before the age of 50 yearsFAP should be excludedtumors should be confirmed with histologyRevision in 1996, and is one of the most widely used criteria at time of writing (July 2016) alongwith Bethesda guidelines.
> or equal to 3 relatives with colorectal cancer (CRC) or with an HNPCC associated cancerendometrial carcinomasmall bowel adenocarcinomaureter or renal pelvis cancer?
1 case in a first degree relative> or equal to 2 successive generations should be affected> or equal to 1 tumor should be diagnosed before the age of 50 yearsFAP should be excludedtumors should be confirmed with histologyendometrial carcinomasmall bowel adenocarcinomaureter or renal pelvis cancer?
1 case in a first degree relativeAn alternative criteria scheme is the Bethesda criteria of HNPCC 2

The Amsterdam wrist rules are validated clinical decision rules for determining which patients require radiographic imaging (wrist radiography) for acute wrist pain following trauma.
The initial study evaluated 882 patients and were published in 2015 1.
The decision rules assessed different clinical parameters that increase the likelihood of either a distal radial fracture or any wrist fracture, but did not recommend a threshold value for imaging or not.
By applying the rule, the study showed an absolute reduction of 10% 1 in the number of radiographs performed, but at a cost of 4 missed fractures (none of which had increased morbidity).For distal radial fractures, the following parameters increase the likelihood of a fracture (with a sensitivity of 98%):increased ageswelling of the wristvisible deformationdistal radius tender to palpationpain on palmar flexionpain on supinationpainful radioulnar ballottement testPain on ulnar deviation was found to decrease the likelihood of a distal radial fracture.
For any wrist fracture, the following parameters increases the likelihood of a fracture (with a sensitivity of 98% and negative predictive value of 90%):increased agemale sexswelling of the wristswelling of the anatomical snuffboxvisible deformationdistal radius tender to palpationpain on radial deviationPainful axial compression of the thumb was found to decrease the likelihood of any wrist fracture.
As with all clinical decision rules, the study 1 supports the use of the rules which aims at selecting appropriate patients for investigation as to avoid unnecessary radiography, thereby decreasing patient radiation exposure.
There are also potential departmental benefits expected to be confirmed with further research including reducing emergency department waiting times and decreasing financial costs.

Amyand hernia is a rare form of an inguinal hernia in which the vermiform appendix is located within the hernial sac.
It is seen in less than 1% of inguinal hernia.
It should not be confused with an appendix-containing femoral hernia, known as De Garengeot hernia.
TerminologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresHistory and etymologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe term applies to inguinal hernia containing appendix regardless of whether there are complications such as appendicitis 5.The appendix may remain in an inguinal hernia without symptoms.
If complications develop, an atypical presentation of acute appendicitis is expected, which may mimic incarcerated inguinal hernia.blind-ending tubular structure arising from cecum and extending into inguinal sacdilated lumen, wall enhancement and thickening, peri-appendiceal fat stranding are suggestive of acute appendicitisextension of the appendix into the inguinal sacif acutely inflamed, the appendix is dilated, non-compressible, thickened and hypervascularClaudius Amyand, was a French surgeon who performed the first successful appendectomy in 1735, on an 11-year-old boy who presented with an inflamed, perforated appendix in his inguinal hernia sac.abdominal herniasLittre hernia

The amygdala (plural: amygdalae) is a very well studied part of the limbic system and forms part of the mesial temporal lobe.
The amygdala is a complex gray matter structure located anterior and superior to the temporal horn of the lateral ventricle and head of the hippocampus.
The anterior extension of the amygdala is identified by the entorhinal sulcus.
Both the amygdala and the hippocampus are derived from the telencephalon.
In 1997, Gloor classified the amygdala into three large groups of nuclei 2,3:basolateralcorticomedial (phylogenetically the oldest 4)central groupThe output fibers of the amygdala is mainly through two efferent fiber systems:stria terminalisventral amygdalofugal pathwayThe stria terminalis has a semicircular course in the body of the lateral ventricle.
The level of the anterior commissure is a very important anatomical landmark because the stria terminalis splits into three parts:precommissural partcommissural partpostcommissural partThe precommissural fibers end in the septal region, and the postcommissural fibers end in the nucleus of stria terminalis.
The commissural fibers connect the contralateral amygdala via the anterior commissure.
The ventral amygdalofugal pathway arises from the dorsomedial aspect of the amygdala, and courses medially through substantia innominata, anterior perforated substance, and fibers spread into the cerebral cortex, brainstem, mediodorsal thalamus, and hypothalamus.
Direct efferent fibers project to the entorhinal cortex as well as the hippocampus 2.The input fibers to the amygdala are mainly represented by sensory fibers, which transfer information from numerous subcortical regions such as the hypothalamus, basal ganglia, septal region, and autonomic centers in the brainstem.
Both the ventral amygdalofugal pathway and the stria terminals carry afferent and efferent fibers together.
Some input fibers project to the amygdala along the olfactory stria, and directly from the temporal lobe.
The basal nucleus of Meynert, and the nucleus of the diagonal band project reciprocally to the amygdala along the ventral amygdalofugal pathway 1,2.superiorly: partly continuous with the inferomedial aspect of the claustrumlaterally: optic tractposteriorly: hippocampus, connected to the tail of the caudate nucleusAmygdala is derived from the Greek amugdalē, meaning almond, as it is almond-shaped.

Amylase is widely employed as a marker of acute pancreatitis and a significant elevation is diagnostic.
PhysiologyInterpretationCauses of hyperamylasemiaCauses of hypoamylasaemiaRelated articlesReferencesα-amylase is a digestive enzyme that is predominantly secreted by the acinar cells of the exocrine pancreas.
It is also secreted by the salivary glands.
Pancreatic amylase is encoded by AMY2, and salivary amylase by AMY1, both genes on chromosome 1 5.The main function of the amylases is to initiate the digestion of complex polysaccharides, primarily starch, to their constituent simple sugars.
This starts in the mouth with salivary α-amylase, which continues to work in the stomach (it is chemically protected from the gastric acid).
In the small bowel, starting in the duodenum, pancreatic α-amylase digests the dietary carbohydrate, aided by remnant salivary α-amylase 3.Starch is mainly composed of two glucose polymers: amylopectin (75%) and amylose (25%), and the main action of amylase is to break their internal α1,4 linkages.
This results in the formation of oligosaccharides, which are primarily maltose, maltotriose, and α-limit dextrins 3.The salivary glands and the pancreas account for most of the normal serum amylase found in a well individual 1.
These two amylase isoforms can be distinguished by laboratory assay.
Normal serum amylase reference range is 19-86 units/liter.
Compared to lipase, the other enzyme measured in suspected cases of acute pancreatitis, amylase has poorer sensitivity and is elevated for a shorter window of time 6.
For this reason lipase is the preferred test for acute pancreatitis.
Amylase is found in small bowel intraluminal fluid and therefore bowel stasis can lead to abnormal absorption of the enzyme.
pancreatitisother pancreatic assaultsERCP/EUS: instrumentation of the main pancreatic ductpancreatic traumapancreatic carcinoma 8bowel diseasebowel ischemia/infarctionbowel perforationintestinal obstruction 8salivary gland pathology e.g. tumorsreduced homeostatic removal of amylaserenal failuremacroamylasemiachronic alcoholismpost-surgicalespecially following coronary arterial bypass grafting (CABG)lactic acidosiseating disordersanorexia nervosabulimiaectopic amylase secretion by cancerGullo syndromeERCP/EUS: instrumentation of the main pancreatic ductpancreatic traumapancreatic carcinoma 8bowel ischemia/infarctionbowel perforationintestinal obstruction 8renal failuremacroamylasemiaespecially following coronary arterial bypass grafting (CABG)anorexia nervosabulimiaHypoamylasaemia was seen in 5% of samples tested for amylase over a one-year period in a recently-published study from a large academic center in London in the UK 7.functionally-absent pancreasmain cause of a low serum amylase is chronic pancreatitis 4post-pancreatectomysevere pancreatic trauma: chronic; acute tends to result in elevated amylase (see above)cystic fibrosisend-stage liver diseasegenetic (very rare)isolated pancreatic amylase deficiencies have been seen in a few families/individualssigns and symptoms of carbohydrate malabsorption are presentmain cause of a low serum amylase is chronic pancreatitis 4post-pancreatectomysevere pancreatic trauma: chronic; acute tends to result in elevated amylase (see above)cystic fibrosisisolated pancreatic amylase deficiencies have been seen in a few families/individualssigns and symptoms of carbohydrate malabsorption are present

Amyloid arthropathy results from the extracellular deposition of the fibrous protein amyloid within the skeletal system and is a skeletal manifestation of amyloidosis particularly in patients on long term haemodialysis.
It may involve either the axial skeleton (especially the cervical spine) or the appendicular skeleton and is distinct from renal osteodystrophy which, however, often co-exists 5.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAmyloid arthropathy is usually haemodialisis-related and is therefore encountered in individuals with chronic renal failure on long term dialysis 5.
The clinical presentation varies according to joints that are affected.
Commonly, this initially manifests as shoulder pain and carpal tunnel syndrome and symptoms are commonly bilateral.
Patients can also develop osteolytic bone lesions (amyloidomas) and pathological fractures.
Some patients may present with spinal involvement including cord compression or radicular symptoms due to nerve root compression 2.
Amyloid arthropathy results from the deposition of β2-microglobulin, particularly in renal failure patients undergoing long-term haemodialysis.
Pathogenesis is probably multifactorial and relates to the duration of renal failure, patient's age, age at commencing haemodialysis and duration of haemodialysis 2.Amyloid protein is not filtered by standard dialysis membranes and tends to accumulate in the musculoskeletal system 1.Features of amyloid arthropathy are those of an erosive and destructive osteoarthropathy, involving most commonly the hips, shoulders and carpal bones.
Distribution is frequently bilateral.
In the large joints, amyloid arthropathy resembles inflammatory arthritis with 1-5:juxta-articular soft tissue swelling(s) mild periarticular osteoporosisjuxta-articular and subchondral cystic lesions (geodes), usually with well-defined sclerotic marginsjoint space is usually normal in width until late in the course of the diseasePatients with amyloidomas of bone or with large subchondral lesions have a high prevalence of pathologic fractures.
In the spine, the intervertebral discs are affected and are often associated with endplate erosions that can mimic infection 5.
Deposition of amyloid in the ligamentum flava as well as within the synovium of facet joints and atlanto-occipital joints and atlantoaxial joints may be seen as erosions 2.
In addition to demonstrating thickening of tendons due to infiltration by amyloid (e.g. supraspinatus and biceps tendons), it is also possible to directly visualize amyloid deposits.
These appear as an accumulation of echogenic material within or adjacent to joints and between muscles bellies and tendons 2.
Joint effusions and accumulation of fluid around tendons and within bursae are also common 2.
The MR imaging appearance of amyloid infiltration within or around the joint consists of extensive deposition of an abnormal soft tissue that usually have the following signal characteristics 2:T1: low signal intensity T2: more variable but usually low to intermediate signal intensityThis abnormal material covers the synovial membrane, fills subchondral defects, and extends to periarticular soft tissue.
Joint effusions are usually present.
The differential for multiple lytic bone lesions includes 5:metastasesmultiple myelomabrown tumorsrapidly destructive osteoarthritisThe differential for the low signal intensity intra-articular/intra-osseous material includes 2: hemorrhagic geodespigmented villonodular synovitishemophilia pseudotumortypically found in renal failure patients undergoing long-term haemodialysisperiarticular soft tissue swelling, joint effusion, and large subchondral erosions ("cysts") deposition of abnormal soft tissue with low signal on all MRI sequencespathologic fracture may occur

Amyloidosis (plural: amyloidoses) is a heterogeneous disease, or even considered a constellation of diseases, resulting in the deposition of relatively similar proteins.
It has many causes and can affect any organ system.
Epidemiology Clinical presentationPathologyReferencesCases and figuresThe disease may have a male predilection.
It typically affects middle-aged individuals around 60 years 5.In view of the vast variety of clinical forms of amyloidosis, the potential spectrum of symptoms and signs is extremely broad, and can present in almost any way.
Amyloid comprises a group of proteins characterized by certain physical properties.
There are at least 15 amyloid proteins, derived from diverse precursors.
Some demonstrate the structural morphology of immunoglobulins, i.e. amyloid light chain.primary amyloidosis: associated with monoclonal plasma cell dyscrasiassecondary amyloidosis: usually occurs secondary to a tissue destructive and inflammatory processtuberculosis rheumatoid arthritismultiple myeloma Crohn diseaseankylosing spondylitisSjogren syndromedermatomyositishereditary amyloidosis: can be seen with familial Mediterranean fever (FMF)senile amyloidosislocalized amyloidosis: sometimes classified as a separate entity with the above four accounting for the systemic formsdialysis-related amyloidosis 7: can occur with either haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysistuberculosis rheumatoid arthritismultiple myeloma Crohn diseaseankylosing spondylitisSjogren syndromedermatomyositisIn certain scenarios, the amyloid proteins are produced and deposited locally, whereas in others, the protein is distributed systemically.
The majority occur in the systemic form:AL (amyloid light chain)synthesized by plasma cells, and seen in conditions with monoclonal proliferation of these cellsAA (amyloid associated)derived from SAA (serum amyloid A) protein which is synthesized by the liver and forms part of the HDL3 lipoproteinstypically seen in chronic inflammatory disease or familial Mediterranean feverAß2M (amyloid ß2-microglobulin)derived from ß2-microglobulinseen in patients on haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysisATTR (amyloid transthyretin)seen in senile systemic amyloidosis/neuropathic cerebral angiopathyis the most common form of familial amyloidosis 5synthesized by plasma cells, and seen in conditions with monoclonal proliferation of these cellsderived from SAA (serum amyloid A) protein which is synthesized by the liver and forms part of the HDL3 lipoproteinstypically seen in chronic inflammatory disease or familial Mediterranean feverderived from ß2-microglobulinseen in patients on haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysisseen in senile systemic amyloidosis/neuropathic cerebral angiopathyis the most common form of familial amyloidosis 5Accounts for ≈15% of amyloidosis:A4ß2 (beta-amyloid protein): seen in Alzheimer diseaseAANF (atrial natriuretic factor): isolated atrial amyloidosisAIAPP (islet amyloid peptide): deposited in the pancreas in patients with type II diabetes mellitusACal: seen in medullary islet cell tumorAmyloid deposition can occur in any part of the body, although some are more common and have specific imaging findings.
These conditions are best discussed separately:breast amyloidosiscardiac amyloidosiscerebral amyloid deposition diseasesAlzheimer diseasecerebral amyloid angiopathycerebral amyloid angiopathy-related inflammationcerebral amyloidomagastrointestinal amyloidosishepatic amyloidosispulmonary amyloidosisrenal amyloidosisskeletal amyloidosisamyloid arthropathysplenic amyloidosistracheobronchial amyloidosisurinary tract amyloidosisAlzheimer diseasecerebral amyloid angiopathycerebral amyloid angiopathy-related inflammationcerebral amyloidomaamyloid arthropathyAmyloid is an insoluble extracellular proteinaceous substance composed of cross-ß-pleated sheets which display apple-green birefringence when viewed under polarized light after being treated with Congo red stain 1.multiple myeloma (with primary amyloidosis)

Amyopathic dermatomyositis (ADM) is recognized as a distinct subtype of dermatomyositis where there is a typical skin rash of classic dermatomyosiytis but without muscle involvement.
This form may be further divided into anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) antibody-positive clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) antibody-negative clinically amyopathic dermatomyositis interstitial lung disease: malignancies:according to one study, malignancy of the genitourinary organs (most common), aerorespiratory organs and breast were the most commonly observed solid organ tumors 2.
according to one study, malignancy of the genitourinary organs (most common), aerorespiratory organs and breast were the most commonly observed solid organ tumors 2.

Amyoplasia congenita is a syndrome characterized by multiple specific congenital joint contractures, associated with substitution of muscular tissue by fibrosis and adipose tissue.
The estimated incidence is at  1: 10000 live births.
There may be a higher prevalence with twin pregnancies 1.The muscles are hypoplastic and replaced by a mixture of fat and fibrosisIt is throught to occur sporadicallyFeatures includearthrogryposisclub feetThe term a-myo-plasia essentially derives from the Latin meaning no-muscle-development

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig disease or Charcot disease, is the most common form of motor neuron disease 1,4 resulting in progressive weakness and eventual death due to respiratory insufficiency.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresALS typically is diagnosed in middle age.
There is a recognized male predilection 1.Both upper and lower motor neurons are affected, with decreased motor strength and wasting of the muscles of the face, limbs, and diaphragm.
There is a progressive loss of motor strength, with preservation of intellectual and sensory function.
In the hands, the split hand sign or split hand plus sign may be characteristically seen.
El Escorial criteria for the diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 7:it requires the presence ofsigns of lower motor neuron (LMN) degeneration by clinical, electrophysiological or neuropathologic examinationsigns of upper motor neuron (UMN) degeneration by clinical examinationprogressive spread of signs within a region or to other regionstogether with the absence ofelectrophysiological evidence of other disease processes that might explain the signs of LMN and/or UMN degenerationsneuroimaging evidence of other disease processes that might explain the observed clinical and electrophysiological signssigns of lower motor neuron (LMN) degeneration by clinical, electrophysiological or neuropathologic examinationsigns of upper motor neuron (UMN) degeneration by clinical examinationprogressive spread of signs within a region or to other regionselectrophysiological evidence of other disease processes that might explain the signs of LMN and/or UMN degenerationsneuroimaging evidence of other disease processes that might explain the observed clinical and electrophysiological signsALS is a relentlessly progressive neurological disorder characterized by the death of upper motor neurons (Betz cells in the cortex) and anterior horn cells with secondary Wallerian degeneration 2.The majority of cases are sporadic and thus less well understood.
In the familial form of ALS several genes mutations have been identified (e.g. SOD1, TDP-43, FUS, and the hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72) 5.The earliest MR manifestation is hyperintensity on T2-weighted imaging in the corticospinal tracts, seen earliest in the internal capsule, as the fibers are most concentrated here.
Eventually, the entire tract from motor strip to the spinal cord is affected by increased T2 signal and volume loss 3.Iron deposition in the cortex, most notably in the precentral gyrus, is demonstrated as loss of signal on GRE and SWI 8,9, but may also be seen on T2-weighted imaging in ~50%.It is important to note that both of these features are present in varying degrees in normal control patients, and as such an appreciation of what is too much is essential if MRI is to be of benefit.
T2: hyperintensity in the corticospinal tracts (specificity <70% and sensitivity <40%) 6GRE/SWI: hypointensity in the precentral gyrus bilaterally, known as the "motor band sign" 8,9MR spectroscopy 2decreased NAAdecreased glutamateincreased cholineincreased myo-inositoldecreased NAAdecreased glutamateincreased cholineincreased myo-inositolALS typically progresses to death in 2-6 years, usually from respiratory complications 5.

Anal atresia, or imperforate anus, refers to a spectrum of anorectal abnormalities ranging from a membranous separation to complete absence of the anus.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisComplicationsSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThe estimated incidence is 1 in 5000 live births.
Clinically there is no anal opening.
Subtypes can be classified into two broad categories: high (supralevator) or low (infralevator), depending on the location of the atretic portion.
Most cases are sporadic, with occasional familial formsThere are frequent associations with other congenital abnormalities.other atresiasesophageal atresia 4VACTERL associationcaudal regression syndrome: associated sacral agenesis and lower limb hypoplasiaCurrarino's triad; anorectal malformations with sacral anomalies and presacral mass lesion 6fistulous tracts to the urethra or vagina may be present or may have a single cloacal openingesophageal atresia 4can be variable depending on the site of atresia (i.e. high or low), level of meconium impaction and physiological effects such as strainingmay show multiple dilated bowel loops with an absence of rectal gasair within urinary bladder suggests high type 6calcified meconium in the bowel loops would suggest high type (meconium calcifies due to urine exposure) 6air within urinary bladder suggests high type 6A coin/metal piece is placed over the expected anus and the baby is turned upside down (for a minimum 3 minutes).The distance of the gas bubble in the rectum from the metal piece is noted:>2 cm denotes high type<2 cm denotes low typeFalse positive: if image is taken in the 1st 24 hours of life or impacted meconium in distal rectum 6.
to detect a rectourinary, rectovaginal, or rectoperineal fistulathe fistula is considered low (below the levator ani plane) if it is below the pubococcygeal line (PCL) and high if above itthe anus may be seen as an echogenic spot at the level of the perineum and in anal atresia this echogenic spot may be absent 4may show bowel dilatationan infracoccygeal or transperineal approach may allow differentiation between high and low subtypes 4kidneys should be assessed in such patients 6spinal US can reveal spinal cord lesions like tethering of cord 6Can be used pre/postoperatively to study pelvic floor, renal and spinal abnormalities 6.
low subtypes are treated with anoplasty   high subtypes are treated with colostomy with subsequent potential repair  meconium peritonitisduodenal atresiasmall bowel atresia

MRI protocol for anal canal cancer is a group of MRI sequences put together to asses extension and stage anal canal tumors.
Note: This article is intended to outline some general principles of protocol design.
The specifics will vary depending on MRI hardware and software, radiologist's and referrer's preference, institutional protocols, patient factors (e.g. allergy) and time constraints.
No special patient preparation is usually needed for the anal canal MRI (cf.
other bowel MRI protocols).
A good protocol for this purpose would include:T1 weightedplane: axial whole pelvissequence: fast-spin echo (T1 FSE) or gradient (T1 MPRAGE)purpose: anatomical overview (some institutions replace this sequence for T2 weighted images of the whole pelvis)T2 weightedplane: axial whole pelvisanal canal centered high-spatial-resolution images (small FOV) on three planes 2axial: perpendicular to the long axis of the anal canalcoronal: parallel to the long axis of the anal canalsagittalsequence: T2 FSE, high-resolution T2-weighted sequences with the small FOV imagespurpose:​whole pelvis: anatomical overview small FOV: delineation of anal canal layers allowing evaluation of tumor depth (hyperintense submucosa, hypointense muscularis propria, and hypointense mesorectal fascia) 2coronal images aid in assessing for extension along with the internal and external sphinctersdiffusion-weighted imaging (DWI)plane: axialsequence: DWI: B=0, B=1000 and ADC purpose: evaluation of the tumor cellularity; assessment of tumor recurrence after treatment 4 postcontrast sequencesmost institutions do not include post contrast images on the assessment of anal canal tumors as it is unlikely to give additional information to the high-resolution T2 images 2-4plane: axial whole pelvissequence: fast-spin echo (T1 FSE) or gradient (T1 MPRAGE)purpose: anatomical overview (some institutions replace this sequence for T2 weighted images of the whole pelvis)plane: axial whole pelvisanal canal centered high-spatial-resolution images (small FOV) on three planes 2axial: perpendicular to the long axis of the anal canalcoronal: parallel to the long axis of the anal canalsagittalsequence: T2 FSE, high-resolution T2-weighted sequences with the small FOV imagespurpose:​whole pelvis: anatomical overview small FOV: delineation of anal canal layers allowing evaluation of tumor depth (hyperintense submucosa, hypointense muscularis propria, and hypointense mesorectal fascia) 2coronal images aid in assessing for extension along with the internal and external sphinctersaxial: perpendicular to the long axis of the anal canalcoronal: parallel to the long axis of the anal canalsagittal​whole pelvis: anatomical overview small FOV: delineation of anal canal layers allowing evaluation of tumor depth (hyperintense submucosa, hypointense muscularis propria, and hypointense mesorectal fascia) 2coronal images aid in assessing for extension along with the internal and external sphincterscoronal images aid in assessing for extension along with the internal and external sphinctersplane: axialsequence: DWI: B=0, B=1000 and ADC purpose: evaluation of the tumor cellularity; assessment of tumor recurrence after treatment 4 most institutions do not include post contrast images on the assessment of anal canal tumors as it is unlikely to give additional information to the high-resolution T2 images 2-4

The anal canal is the terminal part of the gastrointestinal tract.
Anatomically, the anal canal is referred to as the terminal alimentary tract between the dentate line and anal verge.
However, histologically it extends more proximally and includes the columns of Morgagni and anal sinuses.
Surgically, the anal canal is referred to as the portion of bowel between the anorectal sling and the anal verge.
The anal margin is arbitrarily defined as the 5 cm of skin surrounding the anal verge.
Gross anatomyBlood supplyLymphatic drainageInnervationDevelopmentVariant anatomyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe anal canal measures ~4 cm long and is continuous with the rectum at the anorectal junction, which is the right angle (the anorectal angle) the rectum makes at the levator ani (i.e. the pelvic floor).
The anal canal is a muscular tube, just like the rest of the gastrointestinal tract, but the difference being is that the muscular layer is circular forming the external and internal anal sphincters.
The dentate (pectinate) line separates the anal canal into an upper and lower parts, not only in structure but also in neurovascular supply (reflecting the differing embryological origin).
The dentate line is formed by the anal columns, which consists of a series of anal sinuses (which drain anal glands) at approximately the midpoint of the anal canal.
Note that the dentate line is a "watershed area" and that the exact transition of epithelium and neurovascular supply is varied.
Above the dentate line the epithelium is a mucous membrane like the rest of the gastrointestinal tract and below the dentate line the epithelium is considered cutaneous (i.e. stratified squamous keratinized with hair and sebaceous glands).arterial supplyabove dentate line: superior rectal artery (from inferior mesenteric artery); small contributions from middle rectal artery (directly from internal iliac artery) and median sacral arteriesbelow dentate line: inferior rectal artery (from internal pudendal artery)venous drainage: continuous with rectal venous plexus (i.e. rich anastomoses)above dentate line: superior rectal vein to inferior mesenteric vein (portal venous system)below dentate line: inferior and middle rectal veins to internal iliac veinsabove dentate line: superior rectal artery (from inferior mesenteric artery); small contributions from middle rectal artery (directly from internal iliac artery) and median sacral arteriesbelow dentate line: inferior rectal artery (from internal pudendal artery)above dentate line: superior rectal vein to inferior mesenteric vein (portal venous system)below dentate line: inferior and middle rectal veins to internal iliac veinsThe anal canal is a site of portosystemic anastomosis.
above dentate line: internal iliac nodesbelow dentate line: superficial inguinal nodesabove dentate line and internal anal sphinctersympathetic: pelvic plexusparasympathetic and afferent sensory: pelvic splanchnic nervesbelow dentate line and external anal sphincterinferior rectal branches of the pudendal nerve sympathetic: pelvic plexusparasympathetic and afferent sensory: pelvic splanchnic nervesinferior rectal branches of the pudendal nerve The upper part of the anal canal derives from the dorsal compartment of the cloaca (endoderm) and the lower part is derived from proctodeum (ectoderm).imperforate anus1 in 1500-5000 newbornsfailure of the bowel to open to the external worldmay vary from stenosis to blind anal canal/rectum to absent anal canal1 in 1500-5000 newbornsfailure of the bowel to open to the external worldmay vary from stenosis to blind anal canal/rectum to absent anal canal

The most recent version of TNM staging of anal cancer is as follows:TX: primary tumor cannot be assessedT0: no evidence of primary tumorTis: carcinoma in situ (Bowen disease, high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion [HSIL], anal intraepithelial neoplasia II-III (AIN II-III)T1: tumor 2 cm or less in greatest dimensionT2: tumor >2 cm but <5 cm in greatest dimensionT3: tumor >5 cm in greatest dimensionT4: tumor of any size invades adjacent organ(s), e.g. vagina, urethra, bladder (note that direct invasion of the rectal wall, perirectal skin, subcutaneous tissue, or the sphincter muscle(s) is not classified as T4)Nx: regional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0: no regional lymph node metastasisN1: metastasis in regional lymph nodesN1a: metastases in inguinal, mesorectal, and/or internal iliac lymph nodesN1b: metastases in external iliac lymph nodesN1c: metastases in external iliac and in inguinal, mesorectal, and/or internal iliac lymph nodesMx: distant metastasis cannot be assessedM0: no distant metastasisM1: distant metastasisInvolvement of para-aortic or more distant lymph nodes is considered as M1.

Anal cancer is a relatively uncommon, accounting for less than 2% of large bowel malignancies, and most of the cases are made of squamous cell carcinoma.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresReferencesCases and figuresIt accounts for less than 2% of large bowel malignancies and 1-6% of anorectal tumors (~1.5% of all gastrointestinal tract malignancies in the United States 14).
There may be a slight male predilection where its incidence has been reported to be approximately 0.5 per 100 000 in men and 1.0 per 100 000 in women 1.
Its incidence is thought to be rising over the years 5.Approximately 45% of patients may present with bleeding per rectum.
Around 30% of patients may have pain and/or a sensation of a mass.
Anal carcinoma typically originates between the anorectal junction above and the anal verge below.
The vast majority of anal canal cancers are squamous cell cancers.
See WHO classification of anal canal tumors.
Both male and female 15:HPV / HIV infectionimmunosuppression number of lifetime sexual partners, and receptive anal intercoursesmokingIn females: previous in situ or invasive cervical, vulval or vaginal cancer 15.
tumor above dentate line: to pararectal and paravertebral nodes 13 tumor below dentate line: to inguinal and femoral nodes 13Imaging performed before treatment provides an assessment of the extent of local disease and nodal involvement.
Accurate delineation of the disease in relation to the rest of the perineal anatomy is of paramount importance in initial imaging assessment.
The size of the tumor is also considered a critical prognostic factor (see staging of anal cancer) 13.Endoanal ultrasound can sometimes be used in locoregional staging 6.
Some authors suggest that endoanal ultrasound can accurately determine the depth of penetration of the carcinoma into the sphincter complex and can be used to accurately gauge the response of these tumors to chemoradiation therapy 8.MRI is the modality of choice in the assessment of locoregional disease and is performed with performed with a dedicated protocol: see MRI protocol for assessment of anal cancer.
Reported typical signal characteristics include 2:T1: primary and recurrent tumors are usually of low to intermediate signal intensity relative to skeletal muscleT2: primary and recurrent tumors are generally of high signal intensity relative to skeletal muscleNodal metastases have a signal intensity similar to that of the primary tumor.
Recent research suggests that there are grounds for using PET-CT routinely in the workup of anal cancer, as it alters the initial staging sufficiently frequently 4.Treatment is often with a combination of chemotherapy and radiotherapy (often given concurrently) and is usually curative.
Approximately 50-60% are thought to present with T1 to T2 lesions carrying a 5-year survival of 80-90% 3.
Some authors suggest a benefit of a salvage abdominoperineal resection (APR) for those patients with failed chemoradiation 10,12.

Anal margin or perianal skin is arbitrarily defined as a skin tissue with a radius of 5 cm from the anal verge, consisting of keratinizing squamous epithelial tissue containing hair follicles.anal margin neoplasms

The anal sphincter is divided into an internal and external anal sphincter.
It surrounds the anal canal.
continuation of inner rectal musclethickened, circular muscle fibers, up to 5 mm thickcomposed of visceral muscleComposed of skeletal muscle and classically categorized into deep, superficial, and subcutaneous parts:deep partcircular muscle fibersblends with puborectalis part of levator ani (posteriorly and laterally)the aforementioned region is called the anorectal ring and is palpable on rectal examinationsuperficial partelliptical muscle fibersattaches from the tip of the coccyx posteriorly to the perineal body anteriorlyonly part of the sphincter with bony attachmentsubcutaneous partcircular muscle fiberslower ends curve inwards, lying below the end of the internal sphincter, the intersphincteric groove that results is palpable on examinationcircular muscle fibersblends with puborectalis part of levator ani (posteriorly and laterally)the aforementioned region is called the anorectal ring and is palpable on rectal examinationelliptical muscle fibersattaches from the tip of the coccyx posteriorly to the perineal body anteriorlyonly part of the sphincter with bony attachmentcircular muscle fiberslower ends curve inwards, lying below the end of the internal sphincter, the intersphincteric groove that results is palpable on examination

The anal triangle forms the posterior half of the diamond-shaped perineum.
The triangle's three corners are defined by the tip of the coccyx posteriorly and both ischial tuberosities anterolaterally.
The anterior border is the transverse perineal muscles and the posterolateral borders are the sacrotuberous ligaments.
It contains the anal canal, anal sphincters, and ischioanal fossae with their corresponding vessels.

The anal verge is part of the anal region and consists of a band of squamous epithelial tissue which lacks hair follicles and extends from the inter-sphincteric groove to the perianal skin.

Anaphylaxis (also known as anaphylactic shock or reaction) is an acute severe systemic type I hypersensitivity reaction, commonly presenting with urticaria/angioedema, hypotension and bronchial hyperreactivity.
It may be fatal.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationTreatment and prognosisReferencesAnaphylactoid reactions result from non-immune system mediated mechanisms.
However they are clinically indistinguishable from anaphylactic reactions with similar risks of multiorgan failure and death.
In practical terms the distinction between anaphylactic and anaphylactoid reactions is academic as clinically they are managed identically 5.
The published epidemiological data from the USA, UK and Australia, demonstrates an incidence rate of anaphylaxis of 7 to 50 cases per 100,000 per annum.
The number of deaths is estimated to be up to 3 per 1,000,000 per year.
There is no gender preference in adults; in prepubescent children, it is more common in boys 1.The typical presentation affects the skin, chest, GI tract and cardiovascular system.
Often the signs and symptoms are indolent in onset and initially mild, such as itching and rashes.urticariaangioedemasystemic hypotensionbronchospasmHowever, up to 20% patients with anaphylaxis lack any evidence of circulatory compromise or dermatological sequelae 2.In radiology, approximately 1 in 40,000 patients will experience anaphylaxis from iodinated contrast media.
Most anaphylaxis will occur within twenty minutes of administration of IV contrast agents, although longer delays are occasionally seen.
Radiological features may includes signs of angioedema involving the face, tongue, lips and larynx - which usually appears as diffuse transpatial edema with circumferential mucosal thickening 7.
Airway narrowing may also be evident.
In practice, most clinicians in most situations should act to treat this situation immediately, with imaging after treatment.
Treatment protocols may vary by institution, however usually involve the administration of epinephrine and oxygen with measures to protect the patient's airway if necessary.
Although fatal outcomes happen, they are rare with proper treatment 6.

Anaplastic ependymomas (WHO grade III ependymomas), in comparison to lower grade ependymomas, are characterized by a higher proliferative rate and a greater tendency to infiltrate surrounding brain or disseminate into cerebrospinal fluid causing drop metastases 1.
The relevance of grading ependymomas is questionable, though, and molecular subgroups are likely to carry greater importance 4.EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAbout 25% of ependymomas exhibit features of anaplasia with a high mitotic rate, microvascular proliferation, cellular pleomorphism, and intratumoral necrosis; these are considered WHO grade lll 2.These tumors have a greater propensity to infiltrate surrounding brain or spinal cord parenchyma and have a higher proliferative rate.
Anaplastic ependymomas have appearances that are similar to grade II ependymomas, although they may have a greater predilection for invading adjacent parenchyma 3,4.The treatment and prognosis of ependymomas are not clearly influenced by histological grading 4.

Anaplastic astrocytomas are WHO grade III lesions, with imaging appearances and prognosis between those of diffuse low-grade astrocytomas (WHO grade II) and glioblastomas (WHO IV), and similarly, they are classified on the basis of IDH mutation as IDH-mutant, IDH-wild-type and NOS (when IDH status is unavailable).
On imaging, these tumors share common features with diffuse low-grade astrocytomas, however, they tend to present with contrast enhancement.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAnaplastic astrocytomas occur in adulthood with a peak incidence between 40 and 50 years of age, which is older than low-grade astrocytomas and younger than glioblastomas 1.
As is the case with most parenchymal brain tumors, patients typically present in one of three ways: seizures, focal neurological deficit or symptoms of increased intracranial pressure.
Pathological features are also intermediate between those of diffuse low-grade astrocytomas (WHO grade II) and glioblastomas (WHO IV).
The key features present in anaplastic astrocytomas that are absent in low-grade tumors are mitotic activity and cellular pleomorphism.
Unlike glioblastomas, however, they do not demonstrate necrosis or vascular proliferation.
CT appearances are intermediate, appearing as regions of low attenuation with positive mass effect.
Enhancement is variable.
Anaplastic astrocytomas appear similar to low-grade astrocytomas but are more variable in appearance and a single tumor demonstrates more heterogeneity.
The key to distinguishing anaplastic astrocytomas from low-grade tumors is the presence of enhancement which should be absent in the latter (although one should note that variants, especially gemistocytic astrocytomas, can demonstrate enhancement).
The pattern of enhancement is very variable 1.
Unlike glioblastomas, anaplastic astrocytomas lack frank necrosis, and as such central non-enhancing fluid intensity regions should be absent 1.
T1: hypointense compared to white matterT2: generally hyperintense but can be heterogeneous in cases with blood calcificationT2-FLAIR: relative hypointensity of most of the tumor except a hyperintense rim (T2-FLAIR mismatch sign)T1 C+ (Gd)very variable but usually at least some enhancement is presentpresence of ring enhancement suggests central necrosis and thus glioblastoma rather than anaplastic astrocytomaMR spectroscopyincreased choline-to-creatine ratioNAA preserved or mildly depressedno significant lactateintermediate levels of myo-inositol (lower than low grade, but higher than GBM) 2MR perfusion: elevated cerebral blood volumevery variable but usually at least some enhancement is presentpresence of ring enhancement suggests central necrosis and thus glioblastoma rather than anaplastic astrocytomaincreased choline-to-creatine ratioNAA preserved or mildly depressedno significant lactateintermediate levels of myo-inositol (lower than low grade, but higher than GBM) 2Compared to glioblastomas, there are relatively few trials looking at treatment regimens for anaplastic astrocytoma 3.
General principles are the same, however, with surgical resection when possible being the treatment of choice with or without subsequent radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy.
This depends on the treating clinician's preference, the degree of resection, patient demographics and whether or not the tumor has recurred.
As is the case with everything about anaplastic astrocytomas, the prognosis is also intermediate between low-grade astrocytomas and glioblastomas.
Typically patients succumb to their tumor in 2-3 years, often with transformation into a glioblastoma 4.
The differential, given the heterogeneous and variable appearance of these tumors, is relatively wide and includes:other astrocytomaslow-grade astrocytomano enhancement (except gemistocytic variant) more homogeneoushigher myo-inositol on MRSyounger ageglioblastoma prominent enhancement with areas of non-enhancement (necrosis)older age groupdepleted NAAabsent myo-inositol cerebral metastasesoften multiple located at grey-white matter junctionabsent NAA, absent myo-inositol ring enhancementolder age groupsubacute cerebral infarctgyriform enhancementvascular territorytumefactive demyelinationopen ring enhancement low-grade astrocytomano enhancement (except gemistocytic variant) more homogeneoushigher myo-inositol on MRSyounger ageglioblastoma prominent enhancement with areas of non-enhancement (necrosis)older age groupdepleted NAAabsent myo-inositol no enhancement (except gemistocytic variant) more homogeneoushigher myo-inositol on MRSyounger ageprominent enhancement with areas of non-enhancement (necrosis)older age groupdepleted NAAabsent myo-inositol often multiple located at grey-white matter junctionabsent NAA, absent myo-inositol ring enhancementolder age groupgyriform enhancementvascular territoryopen ring enhancement

Anaplastic gangliogliomas are uncommon aggressive variants of the far more common low-grade ganglioglioma (WHO grade I).In the current WHO classification of CNS tumors (2016), no criteria have been agreed upon for a ganglioglioma WHO grade II tumor 1.In anapestic gangliogliomas, the aggressive component is the glial (usually astrocytic) component.
The glial astrocytic component demonstrates nuclear pleomorphism, increased mitotic rate, increased cellularity, as well as microvascular proliferation and necrosis 1.

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion oncogene positive non small cell lung cancer refers to a specific set of non small cell lung cancers that contain an inversion in chromosome 2.
They are associated with specific clinical features, including never or light smoking history, younger age, and adenocarcinoma with a signet ring or acinar histology.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferences It may account for 4-5 % of non small cell lung cancers.
They resulting in the novel fusion oncogene EML4-ALK rearrangement is transforming both in vitro and in vivo and defines a distinct clinicopathologic subset of NSCLC.
ALK gene arrangements are "largely but not entirely" mutually exclusive with epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) and KRAS mutations 6.Since it is a new discovery there are not many imaging publications on this topic (i.e. one or two studies per finding).
Some reported features include:more central tumor location 1absence of pleural tail 1associated large pleural effusion 1relatively smaller size 2 lower tumor disappearance rate (TDR) rate following treatment 2may appear as more solid masses with lobulated margins 4They are more responsive to anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) and c-Met receptor kinases such as crizotinib.

Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a form of hematological malignancy.
It as first described in 1985 as a large-cell neoplasm with anaplastic morphology immunostained by the Ki-1 antibody, which recognizes CD30.There are two main sub types anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, ALK-positiveanaplastic large-cell lymphoma, ALK-negativeanaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangementsWHO classification of tumors of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissues

Anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene rearrangements are known to occur in association with several tumors.
The genes codes for an enzyme called anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) or ALK tyrosine kinase receptor / CD246 which is thought o play a role in the brain development and exerts its effects on specific neurons in the nervous system.
Re-arrangements could result in anaplastic lymphoma kinase-1 (ALK-1) protein expression.
The key tumors associated with these rearrangements include:lymphoma - diffuse large cell lymphoma 1certain non-small cell lung cancers - anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) fusion oncogene positive non-small cell lung cancer 2It is also described in association with:neuroblastoma - some familial cases inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor 3 glioblastoma 4renal cell carcinoma - both adult and pediatric forms esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 5breast cancers: notably the inflammatory subtype (inflammatory breast cancer)adenocarcinoma of colonanaplastic thyroid carcinomaUseful in determining the suitability of ALK 1 inhibitor therapy (e.g. crizotinib).ROS 1 mutationHER-2 mutations in lung cancerKRAS mutationEGFR mutation​

Anaplastic meningiomas (also known as malignant meningiomas) are uncommon, accounting for only ~1% of all meningiomas 1.
Along with rhabdoid meningioma and papillary meningioma are considered WHO grade III tumors and demonstrate aggressive local growth and high recurrence rate.
It should be noted that epidemiology, clinical presentation and radiographic features do not reliably distinguish anaplastic meningiomas from benign meningiomas (WHO grade I) and atypical meningiomas (WHO grade II), and thus that content is unnecessarily repeated here.
Generally, these tumors grow faster, have more heterogeneous/aggressive imaging appearances, and have a tendency to recur early.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAnaplastic meningiomas are those with the following histological characteristics 1:obvious malignant features similar to those seen in melanoma, carcinoma, or high-grade sarcoma20 or more mitosis per ten high-power fieldsGenerally, it is not possible to confidently distinguish benign (WHO grade I) and atypical (WHO grade II) from anaplastic (WHO grade III) meningiomas on general morphology.
The most reliable feature in suggesting a non-grade I tumor is the presence of lower ADC values (reflecting higher cellularity)  2,3.Importantly presence of vasogenic edema in adjacent brain parenchyma is not a predictor of atypical or anaplastic histology 3.
Brain invasion, although by definition denoting at least a grade II tumor, is also surprisingly difficult to predict on MRI.
First line therapy is surgical resection with radiotherapy (external beam or brachytherapy) often added both for complete and incomplete resections (see Simpson grade).
Radiation has been shown to improve local control and prolongs overall survival 5.
No effective chemotherapeutic agents have been identified 4.
The recurrence rate is significantly higher (50-94%) than that seen in grade II meningiomas (29-52%) and this correlates with reduced survival 5.

Anaplastic oligodendroglioma is a WHO grade III diffuse infiltrating glioma that has histological features of anaplasia, and molecular markers consistent with an oligodendroglioma (1p19q co-deletion and IDH mutation) as per the current (2016) WHO classification of CNS tumors 1.
They make up 20-50% of all oligodendrogliomas.
If the molecular status is unavailable then the diagnosis relies on histology alone and is given the designation anaplastic oligodendroglioma NOS.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAnaplastic oligodendrogliomas tend to present in a slightly older age group than WHO grade II tumor, presumably on account of them having been undiagnosed for some time.
Clinical presentation is non-specific with symptoms related to increased intracranial pressure and focal neurological deficits being common.
Seizures are also fairly common, but not as common as with WHO grade II oligodendrogliomas 1.
Anaplastic oligodendrogliomas demonstrate increased cellular density, increased mitotic activity, microvascular proliferation and necrosis.
Nuclear anaplasia is also common.
Importantly, and unlike astrocytomas, oligodendrogliomas with necrosis and microvascular proliferation are considered only WHO grade III anaplastic oligodendrogliomas and not WHO grade IV glioblastomas 1.
In other words, if you have a tumor that is both IDH mutated and 1p19q co-deleted you can never call it a glioblastoma.
Having said that occasionally IDH wild-type glioblastomas may have 1p19q deletions.
The radiographic features of anaplastic oligodendrogliomas are highly variable and range from those of oligodendrogliomas to glioblastomas.
Generally, they demonstrate more intense contrast enhancement and more heterogeneity than lower grade tumors 1.
Prognosis with maximal surgical and medical management is significantly poorer than WHO grade II oligodendrogliomas but better than anaplastic astrocytomas 1.
Again, the recent change in classification makes interpretation of survival data difficult, given most of it does not report molecular markers.

Anaplastic oligodendroglioma NOS (not-otherwise-specified) is a diagnosis in the current (2016) WHO classification of CNS tumors denoting a diffuse infiltrating glioma that has histological features of anaplastic oligodendroglioma, but without 1p19q co-deletion status or IDH mutation status being available (either because the test has not been performed, or the markers are equivocal) 1.
It is, therefore, equivalent to the diagnosis of anaplastic oligodendroglioma pre-2016, and it is essential to note that the imaging features of anaplastic oligodendrogliomas defined on histological grounds versus those defined using 1p19q co-deletion and IDH mutation are not identical.
These are discussed further in the article on oligodendroglioma.
Importantly, neither ATRX status (usually the opposite of 1p19q co-deletion status) nor additional immunohistochemical markers such as NOGO-A are substitutes for formal 1p19q co-deletion determination, and as such unless both IDH mutation and 1p19q co-deletion are assessed, the formal diagnosis of anaplastic oligodendroglioma cannot be made.

Anaplastic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas are a more aggressive and less common version of pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA).
In the current (2016) WHO classification of CNS tumors, they are considered WHO grade III lesions (whereas pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas are WHO grade II tumors) 1.
As clinical and imaging features are essentially the same as lower grade tumors, they are not repeated here but rather discussed as part of the article on pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma.
Anaplastic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas are defined as a tumor consistent with a pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma but with an increased mitotic rate of >5 mitoses per 10 high-power fields 1.
Otherwise, histologically they are very similar with lower grade tumors, however, necrosis and vascular proliferation are more common 1.
They can be difficult to distinguish from epithelioid glioblastomas 1.
Anaplastic pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas have a substantially worse prognosis; 40-50% 5-year-survival compared to ~90% 5-year-survival for pleomorphic xanthoastrocytomas 1.

An anaplastic rhabdomyosarcoma is a subtype of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma, characterized by extensive anaplastic cells seen throughout the tumor 1.

The anatomical snuff box is a surface anatomy feature.
It appears as a triangular depression on the lateral surface of the wrist on full extension of the thumb.medial: tendons of the extensor pollicis longuslateral: tendons of theextensor pollicis brevisand more laterally abductor pollicis longusfloorscaphoid, trapezium bonestendons of the extensor carpi radialis longus and brevisbase of 1st metacarpal can be palpated distally and the radial styloid process can be palpated proximallyextensor pollicis brevisand more laterally abductor pollicis longusscaphoid, trapezium bonestendons of the extensor carpi radialis longus and brevisbase of 1st metacarpal can be palpated distally and the radial styloid process can be palpated proximallyradial arterysuperficial branch of the radial nervecephalic vein (variable)In the days when snuff use was popular, the user would place a small amount of snuff from the container into the "anatomical" snuff box (as opposed to the physical snuff box which he carried around in his pocket, hence "anatomical" ), close one nostril with an index finger and sniff the snuff up the open nostril.
It was common practice to offer snuff to those in your company.

The anatomic position, also referred to as the standard anatomic position, is the consistent position of the human body in which positional reference is made for anatomical nomenclature.
It is not reliant on whether the patient is standing, supine, prone, sitting, etc.
The position is defined as if the body is standing erect (hips and knees extended), head facing forward, eyes open and looking directly forwards and mouth closed.
The arms are by the sides (shoulders adducted), the palms are facing forward (elbows extended and wrists supinated) and the feet parallel and together.
In this position, the radius and ulna are parallel.
Interestingly, due to the effect of gravity, the anatomic location of viscera is described when the patient is supine (e.g. surface anatomy of the liver).The penis is described with the flaccid phallus against the anterior abdominal wall, the dorsal surface contacts the abdominal wall and the ventral surface faces anteriorly.
Anatomic planesAnatomic relationsAnatomic terminologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe anatomic planes are expressed in relation to the anatomic position when standing.
The three standard (orthogonal) planes are perpendicular to each other and are:the axial plane (transverse or transaxial plane): horizontal plane perpendicular to the long axis of the bodythe sagittal plane: vertical plane parallel to the median plane (or midsaggital plane which divides the body into two halves); derives its name from the cranial sagittal suturethe coronal plane: vertical plane perpendicular to the median plane; derives its name from the cranial coronal sutureAnatomic description (adjectives) in regards to relationships are referenced to the anatomic position, in that:anterior: towards the front of the body (Latin: before)posterior: towards the back of the body (Latin: after)superior: towards the top of the body (Latin: above)inferior: towards the bottom of the body (Latin: below)medial: towards the midline (Latin: middle)compared with median which is in the midline rather than towards the midlinelateral: away from the midline (Latin: side)proximal: towards the center of the body (Latin: near)distal: away from the center of the body (Latin: far)superficial: towards the surface of the bodydeep: away from the surface of the bodycompared with median which is in the midline rather than towards the midlineOther older or traditional terms are still in use today, some of which are particularly relevant in embryology and include:dorsal: superior or posterior, can be used in structures that protrude away from the body (such as the tongue, penis, nose, foot); an embryological term that describes a structure's position during development which may be altered from the end position after developmentventral: anteriorcaudal: towards the tail (feet); an embryological term derived from vertebrates with tailscephalad: towards the head (a.k.a.
craniad)rostral: anterior; used in brain developmentvolar, palmar: anterior, used in relation to the handplantar: sole of the footradial: radial aspect of the forearmulnar: ulnar aspect of the forearmtibial: tibial aspect of the anatomical legfibular: fibular aspect of the anatomical legmesial, distal: medial and lateral with regards to any toothbuccal: anterior surface of the toothpalatal: posterior surface of a maxillary toothlingual: posterior surface of a mandibular toothunilateral: one side of the bodybilateral: both sides of the bodyipsilateral: on the same side of the bodycontralateral: on the opposite side of the bodyMovement of parts of the body are described in relation to the anatomic position.
They occur in opposing pairs and include:flexion: decrease in the angle of the jointextension: increase in the angle of the jointabduction: movement of limb away from midlineadduction: movement of limb towards the midlinepronation: movement of hand and forearm to bring the palm facing posteriorsupination: movement of hand and forearm to bring the palm facing anteriorcircumduction: circular movement of a joint using a combination of flexion, abduction, extension and adduction such that the distal limb describes a circleulnar deviation: lateral movement of the wrist towards the midlineradial deviation: lateral movement of the wrist away from the midlineopposition: thumb brought to oppose another digitreposition: thumb repositioned back to the anatomic positionelevation: movement of the scapula superiorlydepression: movement of the scapula inferiorlyversion: degree of forward/backward tilt (anteversion and retroversion, respectively); used with the following anatomical structures:tilt of the uterusin around 75% of women, the uterus is anteverted (i.e. tilted forward)in the remaining 25%, it is retroverted (i.e. tilted backward)the difference (in angles) between femoral neck axis and transcondylar axis of kneeregarding the femoral neck, the terms anteversion and retroversion are used for describing pathological tilt, usually of developmental etiologyeversion: movement of the sole of the foot away from the median planeinversion: movement of the sole of the foot towards from the median planeprotrusion: movement of the mandible, lips or tongue anteriorlyretraction: (retrusion) movement of the mandible, lips or tongue posteriorlytilt of the uterusin around 75% of women, the uterus is anteverted (i.e. tilted forward)in the remaining 25%, it is retroverted (i.e. tilted backward)the difference (in angles) between femoral neck axis and transcondylar axis of kneeregarding the femoral neck, the terms anteversion and retroversion are used for describing pathological tilt, usually of developmental etiologyin around 75% of women, the uterus is anteverted (i.e. tilted forward)in the remaining 25%, it is retroverted (i.e. tilted backward)regarding the femoral neck, the terms anteversion and retroversion are used for describing pathological tilt, usually of developmental etiologyThe Terminologia Anatomica is the global standard for correct gross anatomical nomenclature.

Anaplastic thyroid cancer staging refers to TNM staging of anaplastic thyroid carcinomas.
Papillary, follicular, and medullary thyroid carcinomas are staged separately.
The following article reflects the 8th edition manual published by the American Joint Committee on Cancer, which is used for staging starting January 1, 2018 1,2.Primary tumor (T)Regional lymph node (N)Distant metastases (M)Stage groupsChanges since prior versionsSee alsoReferencesTX: primary tumor cannot be assessed T0: no evidence of primary tumorT1: tumor ≤2 cm in greatest dimension limited to the thyroidT1a: tumor ≤1 cm, limited to the thyroidT1b: tumor >1 cm but ≤2 cm, limited to the thyroidT2: tumor >2 cm but ≤4 cm, limited to the thyroidT3: tumor >4 cm limited to the thyroid or gross extrathyroidal extension invading only strap musclesT3a: tumor >4 cm, limited to the thyroidT3b: gross extrathyroidal extension invading only strap muscles (sternohyoid, sternothyroid, thyrohyoid, or omohyoid muscles)T4: gross extrathyroidal extension beyond the strap musclesT4a: tumor invading subcutaneous soft tissues, larynx, trachea, esophagus, or recurrent laryngeal nerveT4b: tumor invading prevertebral fascia or encasing carotid artery or mediastinal vesselsT1a: tumor ≤1 cm, limited to the thyroidT1b: tumor >1 cm but ≤2 cm, limited to the thyroidT3a: tumor >4 cm, limited to the thyroidT3b: gross extrathyroidal extension invading only strap muscles (sternohyoid, sternothyroid, thyrohyoid, or omohyoid muscles)T4a: tumor invading subcutaneous soft tissues, larynx, trachea, esophagus, or recurrent laryngeal nerveT4b: tumor invading prevertebral fascia or encasing carotid artery or mediastinal vesselsNX: regional lymph nodes cannot be assessedN0: no regional lymph node metastasisN0a: one or more lymph nodes confirmed benign by cytology/histologyN0b: no radiologic or clinical evidence of regional lymph node metastasisN1: regional lymph node metastasisN1a: central lymph node metastases to level VI (pretracheal, paratracheal, and prelaryngeal/Delphian lymph nodes) or level VII (upper mediastinal); can be unilateral or bilateralN1b: lateral neck lymph node metastases (levels I, II, III, IV, or V, or retropharyngeal); can be unilateral, bilateral, or contralateralN0a: one or more lymph nodes confirmed benign by cytology/histologyN0b: no radiologic or clinical evidence of regional lymph node metastasisN1a: central lymph node metastases to level VI (pretracheal, paratracheal, and prelaryngeal/Delphian lymph nodes) or level VII (upper mediastinal); can be unilateral or bilateralN1b: lateral neck lymph node metastases (levels I, II, III, IV, or V, or retropharyngeal); can be unilateral, bilateral, or contralateralThe terms pM0 and MX are not valid TNM categories.
The following categories may be used:cM0: no evidence of metastasescM1: distant metastasispM1: distant metastasis, microscopically confirmedstage IVA[T1, T2, T3a], [N0, NX], M0stage IVB[T1, T2, T3a], N1, M0[T3b, T4], [Any N], M0stage IVC[Any T], [Any N], M1[T1, T2, T3a], [N0, NX], M0[T1, T2, T3a], N1, M0[T3b, T4], [Any N], M0[Any T], [Any N], M1Compared to the 7th edition, anaplastic tumors are no longer automatically classified as T4 disease and T category is defined the same as for differentiated thyroid cancers.
The stage groups were modified accordingly to reflect the poor prognosis of anaplastic thyroid cancer: stage IVA indicates intrathyroidal disease, stage IVB indicates extrathyroidal extension or regional nodal metastases, and stage IVC indicates distant metastases.differentiated thyroid cancer staging

Anaplastic thyroid carcinoma is a highly aggressive form of thyroid cancer and accounts for ~1-2% of primary thyroid malignancies.
Of all the subtypes, this carries the worst prognosis.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisTypically occurs in the elderly (peak incidence in 6th to 7th decades).
A significant proportion of patients may have a history of concurrent multinodular goiter.
There is a recognized female predilection 6.Patients tend to present late.
Compressive symptoms of neighboring structures are common.
May show microcalcification 3.
Usually seen as an infiltrative lesion.
CT is useful for assessment of extrathyroidal tumor invasion 1 as well as regional lymph node and distant metastatic involvement, which are generally common at the time of CT assessment 5.The primary tumor typically appears as a highly infiltrative mass about the thyroid gland.radioiodine: usually has no uptake 4.The prognosis is very poor prognosis, with 5 year survival ~5% and considered invariably fatal 6.
These tumors are automatically considered stage IV disease by the TNM staging system.
Consider other infiltrative thyroid neoplasms, such as:thyroid lymphoma sarcoma of thyroidanaplastic thyroid cancer staging

Anatomical variants represent the deviations from the accepted standard human anatomy as printed in the classic textbooks (e.g. Gray's Anatomy 1), and taught in universities, dissecting rooms and clinical practice.
The term "normal anatomic variants" or just "normal variants" is often used interchangeably with "anatomical variants".
Inclusion of the prefix 'normal' can create difficulty as it may imply that there is no pathological ramification of the variance in the anatomy present.
In many cases this might be true, but some variants may be symptomatic/cause significant pathology.
Therefore it may be better to avoid using normal in this way.
Since time immemorial, variations of the 'normal' human anatomy were well-recognized although generally these were cases of gross abnormality, such as a hand with six digits.
Since the systematic study of human anatomy began in the Renaissance, and before the discovery of x-rays, most anatomic variants were discovered through cadaveric dissection or incidentally at surgery.
When the first radiographs were taken it quickly became apparent that the spectrum of variation of anatomy from the learnt standard anatomy was far broader than had been hitherto appreciated.
And for many years patients were (mis)treated for pseudopathology based upon a misinterpretation of a normal anatomic variant as a pathological finding.
As Charles Thurstan Holland (1863-1941), one of the early radiological pioneers stated in 1938 about those earliest days "There were no x-ray departments in any of the hospitals.
There were no experts.
There was no literature.
No one knew anything about radiographs of the normal, to say nothing of the abnormal" 2.Alban Köhler (1874-1947) was a German radiologist who made major contributions to the early work on anatomical variation.
This resulted in his seminal work ‘Roentgenology - The Borderlands of the Normal and Early Pathological in the Skiagram’ a textbook exploring anatomical variations and anomalies, first published in German in 1910, which remains in print to this day (5th English edition 2002).

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyArterial supplyVenous drainageInnervationActionVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articlesorigin:insertion:innervation:action:Having information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee the general article on the structure of an anatomy article here.

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyBlood supplyInnervationVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articleslocation:articulations:blood supply and innervation:relations:Having information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee the general article on the structure of an anatomy article here.

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyBlood supplyInnervationVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articleslocation:movement:ligaments and tendons:relations:you can provide links to other articles about the branchesHaving information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a list

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articleslocation:origin and course:branches and supply:relations:you can provide links to other articles about the branchesHaving information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee the general article on the structure of an anatomy article here.

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyArterial supplyVenous drainageLymphatic drainageInnervationHistologyVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articleslocation:function:blood supply and drainage:relations:Having information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy and related pathology (eg Rathke cleft cysts).Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee the general article on the structure of an anatomy article here.

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articleslocation:boundaries:contents:Having information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee the general article on the structure of an anatomy article here.

As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologyRelated articleslocation:origin and termination:branches and supply:relations:you can provide links to other articles about the branchesHaving information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Helps understand variant anatomy.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee the general article on the structure of an anatomy article here.

Articles pertaining to normal anatomy require a different structure, and the following subheadings are recommended:=====================================================================As with all other articles, the introductory paragraph should introduce the anatomical term and aim to give an interesting summary.
The first sentence should contain the title of the article in bold.
SummaryGross anatomyArterial supplyVenous drainageLymphatic drainageInnervationHistologyVariant anatomyRadiographic featuresDevelopmentHistory and etymologyRelated pathologySee alsoRelated articleslocation: (this first bullet point will depend on the anatomical structure)blood supply:innervation:relations:Having information about normal variation as well as the frequency of such variation is key for radiological anatomy articles.
Development, including fetal, neonatal and pediatric, is key to understanding pathology in children.
Whenever appropriate, this section can clarify the etymology of an anatomical term or elaborate on the historical context of the term's name or eponym.
This section should include links to pertinent related pathology, particularly if the condition has an anatomical basis.
usually best as a listSee separate articles below for these specific anatomic structures:vesselnerveorganjointbonemusclespace or region

The anatomy curriculum is one of our curriculum articles and aims to be a collection of articles that represent the core anatomy knowledge for radiologists and imaging specialists.
General anatomy NeuroanatomyHead and neck anatomyThoracic anatomyAbdominal and pelvic anatomySpinal anatomyLower limb anatomyUpper limb anatomyThere is also a collection of labeled imaging anatomy cases.

The anatomy of an article describes the component parts of any article at Radiopaedia.org.
All articles include a title, the main content, references and other attributes.
TitleContentsReferencesAttributesRelated articlesThe title of the article may seem obvious, but some considerations as to consistency are required.
We use sentence case for titles (i.e. only the first word is capitalized).
Read more: article titleText with internal links to other articles.
Although articles vary greatly in length, we are trying to maintain a uniform article structure where possible.
It is important for the sources of your information to be cited.
Direct references should be made using a superscript citation 1.
In most cases, it looks better if there is a space between the citation and the preceding work, but no space between it and any following punctuation.
This section contains a number of important properties which each article can haveSection: All articles are automatically listed in the "Encyclopedia".
However, there are other specific areas that the article can be listed under, e.g. "mnemonic" or "classification".
Selecting one of these ensures that it is also listed in that section (links immediately below header).
An article can belong to more than one section.
System: This identifies the system to which the article relates, e.g. "Chest", "Central nervous system".
Many articles will have more than one system.
Tags: Tags are words or phrases that you think are useful metadata, e.g. Jefferson fracture may have the tags "trauma" "fracture" "cervical spine".
Each tag should be comma separated.
Tags are clickable allowing linking between similar articles.
Synonyms: A particular structure or condition will often be known by a number of different spellings or names.
Adding synonyms allows other articles to link to this article via a synonym, e.g. "Fallopian tubes" and "Uterine tubes".
Synonyms also allow for alternative spellings, e.g "Thornwaldt cyst" and "Tornwaldt cyst".
By checking the box to the right of the synonym you can elect to list the synonym in the encylopaedia or not.
There is little point listing "Hemorrhage" and "Hemorrhage" and "Hemorrhages" next to each other, however listing both "Fallopian tubes" and "Uterine tubes" is helpful.

Ancient schwannomas are long-standing, benign (WHO grade I) slow growing schwannomas with advanced degeneration.
The term “ancient” has been traditionally used to describe schwannomas showing degenerative changes and diffuse hypocellular areas 1-3.These tumors demonstrate nuclear pleomorphism microscopically, which should not be misinterpreted as malignant features 4.
Features of calcification, hyalinization, and cystic cavitation can be identified on imaging 1-3.

The anconeus epitrochlearis is an accessory muscle at the medial aspect of the elbow.
It is also known as the accessory anconeus muscle or epitrochleoanconeus muscle and should not be confused with the anconeus muscle which is present at the lateral aspect of the elbow.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationGross anatomyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe muscle may be unilateral but has been found to be bilateral in one of four patients with cubital tunnel syndrome 2.
It is present in ~15% (range 3-28%) of the population 3.
It can be asymptomatic or symptomatic when there is compression of the ulnar nerve within the cubital tunnel, leading to ulnar neuritis.origin: medial epicondyleinsertion: olecranonForms the roof of the cubital tunnel when present.
content pendingAxial MR images may demonstrate a mass superficial to the cubital tunnel, where there should normally only be fat.

The anconeus muscle is a small muscle in the posterior compartment of the arm at the lateral aspect of the elbow.
It has little functional significance but should be differentiated from the variably present anconeus epitrochlearis at the medial aspect of the elbow.origin: lateral epicondyle of the humerusinsertion: olecranon of the ulnaarterial supply: posterior interosseous recurrent arteryinnervation: radial nerveaction: elbow extension (weak)In chronic cases of lateral epicondylitis (tennis elbow) increased signal intensity of the nearby anconeus muscle may be an associated finding.

Anemia is the presence of reduced hemoglobin in the blood.
Formally, the World Health Organization (WHO) defines anemia by the hemoglobin concentration in the blood according to age and sex 1:adult men: <130 g/Ladult women: <120 g/LValues for pregnant women and children are different.
The etiology of anemia is traditionally categorized by the volume of the red cell, i.e. the mean cell volume (MCV), into microcytic (MCV <82 fL), normocytic (MCV = 82-98 fL) and macrocytic (MCV >98 fL) anemias.
iron deficiency anemia (IDA): commonest cause of anemiathalassemiaanemia of chronic disease: e.g. rheumatoid arthritis, Hodgkin lymphoma, malignancy, chronic infectionsideroblastic anemia: very raredietary anemia: mixed iron, vitamin B12, and/or folate deficienciesrenal failurehemolytic anemiaerythrocyte diseaseintrinsic: membranopathy, enzymopathy, hemoglobinopathyextrinsic: immune-mediated, microangiopathic, associated with infection, chemical agent (spider venoms), metabolicanemia of chronic diseasebone marrow disease:aplasiaidiopathicparoxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)Fanconi syndromered cell aplasiacongenitalacquiredDiamond-Blackfan syndromemyelodysplastic syndromesecondary bone marrow diseaseinfiltrative disease: metastases, lymphomadrugstoxins e.g. seleniumirradiationinfective: viralimmunologicalintrinsic: membranopathy, enzymopathy, hemoglobinopathyextrinsic: immune-mediated, microangiopathic, associated with infection, chemical agent (spider venoms), metabolicaplasiaidiopathicparoxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)Fanconi syndromered cell aplasiacongenitalacquiredDiamond-Blackfan syndromemyelodysplastic syndromeidiopathicparoxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)Fanconi syndromecongenitalacquiredDiamond-Blackfan syndromeinfiltrative disease: metastases, lymphomadrugstoxins e.g. seleniumirradiationinfective: viralimmunologicaldietary deficiency: vitamin B12, folatemedication toxicity: hydroxyurea, AZT, methotrexatedyserythropoiesis, myelodysplastic syndrome, clonal hematologic disorderhereditary hematologic disorders

The Anderson and D'Alonzo classification is the most commonly used classification of fractures of the odontoid process of C2.type Irarefracture of the upper part of the odontoid pegabove the level of the transverse band of the cruciform ligamentusually considered stabletype IImost commonfracture at the base of the odontoidbelow the level of the transverse band of the cruciform ligamentunstablehigh risk of non-uniontype IIIthrough the odontoid and into the lateral masses of C2relatively stable if not excessively displacedbest prognosis for healing because of the larger surface area of the fracturerarefracture of the upper part of the odontoid pegabove the level of the transverse band of the cruciform ligamentusually considered stablemost commonfracture at the base of the odontoidbelow the level of the transverse band of the cruciform ligamentunstablehigh risk of non-unionthrough the odontoid and into the lateral masses of C2relatively stable if not excessively displacedbest prognosis for healing because of the larger surface area of the fractureAnother classification system is the Roy-Camille classification.

Andersson lesions refer to an inflammatory involvement of the intervertebral discs by spondyloarthritis.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresRheumatic spondylodiskitis is a non-infectious condition that has been shown to occur in about 8% of patients with ankylosing spondylitis, as detected at radiography.
There is some debate about etiology.
Hypotheses range from spinal (stress) fractures to a local delay in the ankylosing process compared to adjacent levels resulting in the last mobile segment.
Radiography depicts irregularities and erosions of the vertebral endplates that are not related to the anterior or posterior edge but rather to the central portion; such findings are now known to be late features of spondyloarthritis.
On MR imaging, these lesions are depicted as disc-related signal intensity abnormalities of one or both vertebral halves of a discovertebral unit; they appear hyperintense on STIR images and hypointense on T1-weighted images, where they are often hemispherically shaped.
Lines of increased signal intensity may be seen at the interface between the annulus fibrosus and nucleus pulposus or within the latter in early disease.
Just as MR imaging is better than conventional radiography in its depiction of anterior spondylitis (or Romanus lesions), MR imaging also provides a superior view of spondylodiskitis, since the edematous changes in early disease are not radiographically-visualized.
There is no consensus regarding management of these lesions and especially when to perform a surgical intervention.
The mainstay of surgical treatment consists of instrumentation and fusion, with correction of kyphotic deformity, if present.
Since radiological appearance, mechanical consequences, prognosis and management in extensive lesions differ from localized lesions, it has been questioned whether the latter should be classified as Andersson lesions.
Some advocate the eponym "Andersson lesion" to be preserved to extensive lesions, which is actually a spinal pseudarthrosis and the final common pathway of several different etiologies.
It is named after a Swedish radiologist, Olof Andersson who first described the findings in 1937.

Androgen deprivation therapy (ADT), also called androgen suppression therapy, or is a form of treatment in prostate cancer, which basically aims to slow prostate cancer growth by blocking the effect of androgens e.g. testosterone.
Such therapy is mainly used for treating men with intermediate- and high-risk localized prostate cancer in combination with radiotherapy 1, 2 .mpMRIshrinkage of prostate volume 3-7loss of T2 signal 3,5increase of ADC values in prostate cancer 5,7 decrease of ADC values of benign prostatic tissue 5,6,7reduced DCE of prostate cancer 4,6shrinkage of prostate volume 3-7loss of T2 signal 3,5increase of ADC values in prostate cancer 5,7 decrease of ADC values of benign prostatic tissue 5,6,7reduced DCE of prostate cancer 4,6PET/CTreduced visibility of hormone-sensitive prostate cancer in PSMA PET/CT 8reduced visibility of hormone-sensitive prostate cancer in PSMA PET/CT 8

Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), also known as the testicular feminization syndrome, results from end-organ resistance to androgens, particularly testosterone.
AIS may be complete or incomplete with variable imaging findings.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosis Differential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresThe incidence may vary depending on whether it is complete or incomplete.
Roughly estimated incidence rates are ~1 in 20,000 to 50,000 live births.
Patients can often present with primary amenorrhea.
Affected individuals are genotypically male with a 46XY karyotype but with a female phenotype (male pseudohermaphroditism).
Individuals often have bilateral cryptorchidism.
The undescended testes often produce estradiol.
There may be a blind-ending vagina.
Thought to carry an X linked recessive inheritance 3 where multiple mutations in the androgen receptor (AR) gene has been localized to the long arm of the X chromosome (i.e. Xq11-13).Although it is a disease spectrum it may be subtyped according to the extent of severity as:complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS): Morris syndromeincomplete: partial androgen insensitivity syndrome / Reifenstein syndromeGeneral imaging features include:bilateral cryptorchidism +/- juxta-testicular Mullerian duct cystsabsent/rudimentary uterusshortened vaginaUsually, the first modality to locate the testes, and document absent uterus.
The modality of choice to accurately delineate Mullerian duct anomalies, and localize testes.
It may also diagnose testicular malignancy, if any, in cryptorchid testes 7.These patients have an increased incidence of malignancy in the undescended testes:seminomagonadoblastomaMayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome has female karyotype with normal female genitalia, and ovaries, but the uterus is rudimentary or absent 7.disorders of gender development

Getting a film with anembryonic pregnancy in the radiology fellowship examination is one of the many exam set-pieces that the candidate must be prepared for.
Transabdominal and transvaginal pelvic ultrasound shows a uterus with an intrauterine gestational sac.
MSD is at least 25 mm on the transvaginal scan with no embryo or yolk sac.
The cervix is long and closed.
Both ovaries are normal with no adnexal mass or free fluid.
This is a failed intrauterine pregnancy.
It is my routine practice to inform the patient and the referring doctor.anembryonic pregnancyviva examinationviva techniqueviva preparationexam set-piecesgynecological ultrasound set-piecesobstetric ultrasound set-piecespv bleeding in the examviva techniqueviva preparationexam set-piecesgynecological ultrasound set-piecesobstetric ultrasound set-piecespv bleeding in the exampv bleeding in the exam

Anembryonic pregnancy is a form of a failed early pregnancy, where a gestational sac develops, but the embryo does not form.
The term blighted ovum is synonymous with this but is falling out of favor and is best avoided.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe patient may be asymptomatic, presenting for an early pregnancy ultrasound.
Alternatively, she may present with vaginal bleeding in early pregnancy.
Due to falling hCG levels, the clinical signs of pregnancy tend to subside.
In anembryonic pregnancy, a blastocyst is formed from a fertilised ovum, but the fetal pole/embryo never develops, though histologically some fetal material can be demonstrated in most cases.
Human chorionic gonadotropin (beta-hCG) is formed due to the invasion of the endometrium by the syncytiotrophoblast, and as a result, there is a positive pregnancy test and clinical signs of pregnancy are present.
An anembryonic pregnancy may be diagnosed:when there is no embryo seen on endovaginal scanning in a gestational sac with mean sac diameter (MSD) ≥25 mm 4Orthere is no embryo on follow-up endovaginal scan10 ≥11 days after scan showing gestational sac with yolk sac, but no embryo, or≥ 2 weeks after a scan showing gestational sac without yolk sac or embryo≥11 days after scan showing gestational sac with yolk sac, but no embryo, or≥ 2 weeks after a scan showing gestational sac without yolk sac or embryoAssessment of interval mean sac diameter (MSD) growth has been shown to be insufficiently accurate in the diagnosis of anembryonic pregnancy, due to an overlap of gestational sac growth rates of viable and non-viable pregnancies.
Other ancillary features have been described, and may be considered poor prognostic factors, but do not contribute to the formal diagnosis of a failed pregnancy.
These include: absent yolk sac when MSD >8 mm on transvaginal ultrasound (TVUS)poor decidual reaction: often <2 mmirregular gestational sac shapeabnormally low sac positionConditions that cause the appearance of an empty gestational sac include:early pregnancy (intrauterine) pseudogestational sacgestational trophoblastic disease: especially 1st-trimester molar pregnancies 5

Anencephaly is the most severe form of cranial neural tube defect (NTD) and is characterized by an absence of cortical tissue (although the brainstem and cerebellum may be variably present) as well as an absence of the cranial vault.
The morphological spectrum within anencephaly ranges from holocrania (most severe form) to merocrania (mildest form) 2.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIncidence is around 1:1000.
There is a recognized female predilection with a F:M ratio of ~4:1.In affluent nations, the diagnosis is usually made antenatally.
At birth the diagnosis is made due to obvious malformation of the cranial vault.
It results from a failure of closure of the antral end of the neural tube which is expected to occur at approximately day 24 of embryonal life.
As with many other malformations, a number of associated abnormalities are recognized:other neural tube defects: spina bifida (especially cervical)congenital heart defectscleft lip/palatediaphragmatic hernia(s)spinal dysraphismskeletal anomalies: e.g. clubfeetgastrointestinal abnormalities: e.g. omphaloceleurinary tract abnormalities: hydronephrosis most commonmaternal serum alpha-fetoprotein (MSAFP) levels are highly elevated (x2.5 MoM (multiples of the median)): of all the neural tube defects, anencephaly usually gives the highest elevation in MSAFP 7Anencephaly may be sonographically detectable as early as 11 weeks.
Ultrasound can be a non-invasive, cost effective and fast method to detect anencephaly and has an accuracy of approximately 100% at 14 weeks.
Sonographic features of anencephaly include:no parenchymal tissue is seen above the orbits and calvarium is absent: parts of the occipital bone and mid brain may be present if a small amount of neural tissue is present, it is then termed exencephalythis may be seen at an earlier stageless than expected value for crown rump length (CRL)a "frog eye" or "mickey mouse" appearance may be seen when seen in the coronal plane due to absent cranial bone/brain and bulging orbits.may show evidence of polyhydramnios: due to impaired swallowingthis may be seen at an earlier stageNot surprisingly anencephaly is incompatible with life.
Folic acid therapy may reduce the risk of recurrence.
There is a slight risk (~2.5%) in recurrence of a neural tube defect in future pregnancies.amniotic band syndrome: if the band passes through the headsevere microcephaly Anencephaly should not be confused with hydranencephaly in which the cranial vault is present and absence of cerebral tissue is due to antenatal vascular insult.exencephalyacrania

Aneuploidy refers to an abnormal number of chromosomes, and is a type of chromosomal abnormality.
There are large number potential aneuploidic anomalies.
The most common three in obstetric practice are:trisomy 21: commonest aneuploidic anomalytrisomy 18trisomy 13

Aneurysms are focal abnormal dilatation of a blood vessel.
They typically occur in arteries, venous aneurysms are rare.
Aneurysms may also occur in the heart.
AtheroscleroticatherosclerosisNon-atheroscleroticcongenitalhypertension vasculitis fibromuscular dysplasiainfection: mycotic aneurysm, syphilis (luetic aneurysm)hereditary connective tissue disordersMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndrometraumaiatrogenicmyocardial infarction: may cause left a ventricular aneurysmflow related (in cerebral AVM, contralateral ICA occlusion etc)fibromuscular dysplasiainfection: mycotic aneurysm, syphilis (luetic aneurysm)Marfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndromeMorphologically there are two main types of aneurysms.
The morphology is not specific for any cause:Occasionally a 3rd type, serpentine aneurysm has been classified as a separate entity 3.rupturedistal thromboembolismpressure effectsthoracic aortic aneurysmabdominal aortic aneurysmpopliteal artery aneurysmcerebral berry aneurysmcoronary artery aneurysmsplenic artery aneurysmceliac artery aneurysmmycotic aneurysm

Aneurysmal bone cysts (ABC) are benign expansile tumor-like bone lesions of uncertain etiology, composed of numerous blood-filled channels, and mostly diagnosed in children and adolescents.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAneurysmal bone cysts are primarily seen in children and adolescents, with 80% occurring in patients less than 20 years of age 8.Patients may present with pain, which may be of insidious onset or abrupt due to pathological fracture, with a palpable lump or with restricted movement.
Aneurysmal bone cysts consist of blood-filled spaces of variable size that are separated by connective tissue containing trabeculae of bone or osteoid tissue and osteoclast giant cells.
They are not lined by endothelium.
A fine needle aspiration cytology is usually nondiagnostic, often dominated by fresh blood 7.Although often primary, up to a third 11 of aneurysmal bone cysts are secondary to an underlying lesion (e.g. fibrous dysplasia, osteosarcoma, giant cell tumor 4, chondromyxoid fibroma 16, non-ossifying fibroma 17, chondroblastoma 18).A variant of aneurysmal bone cysts is the giant cell reparative granuloma which is usually seen in the tubular bones of the hands and feet as well as in the craniofacial skeleton.
Occasionally they are also seen in appendicular long bones where they are known as solid aneurysmal bone cysts.
Histologically these two entities are identical 6.They are typically eccentrically located in the metaphysis of long bones, adjacent to an unfused growth plate.
Although they have been described in most bones, the most common locations are 4,8:long bones: 50-60%, typically the metaphysislower limb: 40%tibia and fibula: 24%, especially proximal tibiafemur: 13%, especially proximallyupper limb: 20%spine and sacrum: 20-30%especially posterior elements, with extension into the vertebral body in 40% of cases 8craniofacial: jaw, basisphenoid, and paranasal sinusesepiphysis, epiphyseal equivalent, or apophysis: rare but importantlower limb: 40%tibia and fibula: 24%, especially proximal tibiafemur: 13%, especially proximallyupper limb: 20%tibia and fibula: 24%, especially proximal tibiafemur: 13%, especially proximallyespecially posterior elements, with extension into the vertebral body in 40% of cases 8Radiographs demonstrate sharply defined, expansile osteolytic lesions, with thin sclerotic margins.
CT will demonstrate these findings to a greater degree and is also better at assessing cortical breach and extension into soft tissues.
Additionally, CT can demonstrate fluid-fluid levels, which are harder to appreciate than on MRI and require viewing with narrow window width 3.Doughnut sign: increased uptake peripherally with a photopenic center.
MRI is able to demonstrate the characteristic fluid-fluid levels exquisitely as well as identify the presence of a solid component suggesting that the aneurysmal bone cyst is secondary.
The cysts are of a variable signal, with a surrounding rim of low T1 and T2 signal.
Focal areas of high T1 and T2 signal 8 are also seen presumably representing areas of blood of variable age (see aging blood on MRI).It is important to remember that the presence of fluid-fluid levels, although characteristic of aneurysmal bone cysts, is by no means unique to them, and is seen in other lesions as well, both benign and malignant (e.g. giant cell tumors (GCT), chondroblastoma, simple bone cysts and telangiectatic osteosarcomas).T1 (C+): septations may enhance 12Aneurysmal bone cysts are poorly vascular 15Traditionally, these lesions have been treated operatively (curettage and bone grafting) with a recurrence rate of ~20% (range 11-31%).
Percutaneous treatment with fibrosing agents has also been performed, either in isolation or as a precursor to surgical excision 1,5.Spontaneous regression may occur, including following partial removal, but this is not the typical natural history 13,14.The differential diagnosis depends on the modality.
On plain radiography (and to a lesser degree CT), the diagnosis includes most of the lesions included in the mnemonic FEGNOMASHIC.
Compared to the other lesions in this list, aneurysmal bone cysts are markedly expansile (hence, "aneurysmal") and have a thin cortical shell.
On MRI the differential is much shorter, especially when age, location and plain film appearance is taken into account.
The main differential includes both lesions with intrinsic fluid-fluid levels (see fluid-fluid level containing bone lesions) and those from which an aneurysmal bone cyst may arise:chondroblastomafibrous dysplasiagiant cell tumor (GCT) 4osteosarcoma: especially telangiectatic osteosarcoma

Aneurysms of the portal vein are extremely rare and represent only 3% of all aneurysms of the venous system.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresComplicationsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresMost patients are asymptomatic but may present with nonspecific abdominal pain as a major symptom 2-4.Both congenital and acquired causes have been proposed.
Acquired causes may include 2-3:portal hypertension: could be contributory but is not essential to the development of portal venous system aneurysms; indeed, the majority of patients do not have portal hypertension or chronic liver diseasenecrotizing pancreatitisabdominal trauma or surgeryliver cirrhosisThe most common locations for aneurysms of the portal venous system are 2-3:splenomesenteric venous confluencemain portal veinintrahepatic portal vein branches at bifurcation sitesThe rarest locations are the splenic, mesenteric, and umbilical veins.
Diagnosis can be made when the portal vein exceeds 20 mm in diameter.
Color Doppler ultrasound is the most helpful diagnostic tool.
Further workup may not be necessary 4.
An aneurysm appears on ultrasound as an anechoic mass showing direct luminal continuity with the portal venous system and displays spectral findings characteristic of the portal venous system on color Doppler interrogation 5-6.Dynamic helical CT demonstrates simultaneous enhancement with the portal system 5-6.In T1-weighted images, aneurysms are hypointense owing to the flow-void phenomenon 5.Complications include 2-4:thrombosis and distal embolismportal hypertensionrupturecompression of the duodenumcompression of the common bile duct causing jaundice, cholestasis, and cholelithiasis

Angina or angina pectoris is cardiac chest pain that occurs as the result of myocardial ischemia.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisAngina is classically described as substernal chest discomfort that is of a typical quality and duration (heavy, tight, ‘bandlike’ pain that lasts for minutes at a time).
Angina is generally provoked by exertion or emotional stress and rapidly relieved by rest and/or nitrates (within minutes).Two main types of angina are recognized:stable angina: chest pain only occurs with exertion or emotional stressunstable anginachest pain can occur at any time, including at restthis falls under the spectrum of acute coronary syndromes and is therefore generally treated as suchchest pain can occur at any time, including at restthis falls under the spectrum of acute coronary syndromes and is therefore generally treated as suchExamination will often be unremarkable.
There may be evidence of hypertension or hypercholesterolemia.
Angina is generally the result of coronary artery atherosclerosis but remember angina may occur in the context of other cardiac disease, for instance with severe aortic stenosis; these patients will generally have a systolic murmur.
Cardiac biomarkers (such as high-sensitivity troponin) would be expected to be normal (or at least normal for the patient).
New elevation of biomarkers would by definition be myocardial infarction rather than angina.
Between attacks, the ECG may be normal.
During an attack, ST depression or T-wave inversion may be seen.
Plain radiograph of the chest will usually be normal unless there is another co-existing pathology (such as cardiac failure).Computed tomography of the chest may be normal, or may demonstrate features of co-existing pathologies (as with plain radiography).
Calcification of the coronary arteries or heart valves may also be demonstrated on CT.Treatment is generally with anti-anginal medications to reduce cardiac preload/afterload (including beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers and nitrates).Patients that are deemed higher risk or who have troubling symptoms may undergo coronary angiography, possibly with angioplasty/stenting of narrowed arteries.
As angina usually is representative of coronary artery atherosclerosis, affected patients will be more at risk of myocardial infarction (which is usually the result of plaque rupture).

Angiocentric gliomas are rare superficial slow-growing brain tumors typically presenting in young patients with intractable partial epilepsy 1-6.
They were first introduced in the 2007 (4th) edition of the WHO brain tumor classification, and are classified as WHO grade I tumors 1.
For a general discussion of clinical presentation, epidemiology, and treatment, please refer to the article on low-grade astrocytomas.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesAngiocentric gliomas are very rare tumors with relatively few reported cases.
They usually affect children and young adults 1,6.
No reported gender predilection has been reported 1.
Seizures are the classical presentation, with over 95% of patients presenting with intractable seizures 3.Angiocentric gliomas are designated as WHO grade I tumors 1-3.
The exact etiology of angiocentric gliomas remains unclear although some features are similar to ependymomas 1,6.
In fact, sometimes, a distinct ependymoma component may co-exist 1.These tumors demonstrate a monomorphic population of elongated spindle-shaped bipolar cells with a strikingly perivascular orientation, somewhat reminiscent to perivascular pseudorosettes 1,6.
Although tumor cells do extend into the surrounding parenchyma, a strong predilection for perivascular spread is evident 6.
Subpial growth along the surface of the cortex is also a prominent feature 1,6.The immunophenotype shares some similarities to ependymomas 1.
GFAP: positiveEMA: both surface and perinuclear cytoplasmic dot may be presentKi-67 index is usually <5% 1.
They do not demonstrate neuronal markers (e.g. synaptophysin, chromogranin-A, neuronal nuclear antigen) and they are isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) negative.
Cortical dysplasia may be associated.
Angiocentric gliomas are usually cortical or subcortical (grey-white matter junction), typically well-delineated, supratentorial tumors that tend to expand affected gyri.
They exhibit a propensity to spread horizontally in the subpial plane and deeply along vessels 1.Typically appear as an expansile non-enhancing cortical tumor.
T1hypointensehyperintense rim may be seenT2 / FLAIRhyperintenseextension toward the ventricles along vesselsmay have cystic-appearing areasT1 C+ (Gd): no enhancementhypointensehyperintense rim may be seenhyperintenseextension toward the ventricles along vesselsmay have cystic-appearing areasAngiocentric glioma was initially identified in 2005 in two separate case reports 2,5 and then introduced in the WHO classification of CNS tumors in 2007.
It remains an entity in the current (2016) WHO classification 1.Given their rarity, on purely imaging grounds it is difficult to distinguish these tumors from more common diffuse gliomas (both astrocytoma and oligodendroglioma).
Other imaging differential considerations include:focal cortical dysplasiacortical tuber (forme fruste of tuberous sclerosis)DNET "bubbly" cortical and subcortical lesionrim of high signal on FLAIRminimal surrounding edemaperivascular spacestotal nulling on the FLAIR sequenceganglioglioma/gangliocytomausually enhancewell definedmultinodular and vacuolating neuronal tumorssubcortical cluster of cystic-like lesions"bubbly" cortical and subcortical lesionrim of high signal on FLAIRminimal surrounding edematotal nulling on the FLAIR sequenceusually enhancewell definedsubcortical cluster of cystic-like lesions

Angioimmunoblastic T-cell lymphoma (AITL) (previously known as angioimmunoblastic lymphadenopathy with dysproteinemia) is a rare, aggressive (fast-growing) form of peripheral T-cell lymphoma.
It only accounts for around 1-2% of all non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
It is one of the more common subtypes of mature T-cell lymphomas.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesIt is more common in the elderly.
The clinical spectrum includes:high feversgeneralized lymphadenopathyskin rashhepatosplenomegalyDespite advances in treatment regimens for angioimmunoblastic T cell lymphoma, prognosis remains poor with an overall 5-year median survival of 32% 3.

Angioinvasive aspergillosis is the most severe and aggressive form of invasive aspergillosis.
It is a life-threatening condition that requires prompt treatment.
Fortunately, it is not seen in the general population and only occurs in profoundly immunocompromised patients.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAngioinvasive aspergillosis is seen in patients who are profoundly immunosuppressed, with underlying causes for this immunodeficiency that include 1:prolonged high dose corticosteroidsneutropenia (absolute neutrophil count <500/μL)graft-vs-host disease after allogeneic bone marrow transplantationend-stage AIDSInfection with Aspergillus spp occurs in up to 10% of patients who received allogeneic stem cell transplantation 5-6.
Aspergillus, unlike other pulmonary infections, can infect the lung at any stage following stem cell transfusion 6.Clinical presentation is non-specific and thus in the correct patient population requires a low threshold for investigation.
Typical symptoms include cough and fever.
Pleuritic chest pain and hemoptysis may also be present 1.Spores of a variety of Aspergillus spp are inhaled and begin to proliferate in the alveoli.
The hyphae are able to invade pulmonary arteries resulting in pulmonary necrosis and hemorrhage 1.
They may also gain access to the systemic circulation and are haematologically disseminated to the kidneys, gastrointestinal tract, and the central nervous system.
Systemic dissemination occurs in 25-50% of cases 1.If the neutrophil count recovers (in patients where neutropenia is the cause of the immunosuppression), the central necrotic area of lung demarcates, shrinks and separates from the adjacent viable tissue.
It is this separation that creates the air crescent sign 6.Typical appearances are those of solitary or multiple pulmonary nodules/masses.
Wedge-like areas of ill-defined opacities may also be seen most likely representing infarcts due to the invasion of proximal pulmonary vessels 2.
An air crescent may be visible when recovery commences, although it is seen earlier on CT.As on plain radiography, CT findings demonstrate solitary or multiple pulmonary nodules/masses.
A halo of hemorrhage may be seen around the nodule as a result of invasion into pulmonary vessels and is seen as an area of ground-glass opacity 2-4.
A reverse halo may also be encountered 7.
In the correct clinical setting, these findings are strongly suggestive of angioinvasive aspergillosis and warrant institution of appropriate therapy until proven otherwise (see below).
Peripheral wedge-like areas of consolidation representing hemorrhagic pulmonary infarcts are seen better on CT than plain films 3.
Direct invasion into the adjacent chest wall or mediastinal structures may be seen in advanced cases 4.Eventually, if recovery occurs, the central necrotic lung separates away from surrounding parenchyma, forming an air crescent.
This typically occurs 2-3 weeks after treatment 3.
Cavitation may also occur.
Lymph node enlargement and pleural effusions are not usually seen 1.The mainstay of treatment is intravenous amphotericin B. If the patient recovers, resection of the residual mass may be required 4.
Prognosis is generally poor, although early diagnosis and treatment may result in recovery 3-4.In the correct clinical setting, the presence of new nodules with ground-glass halo or reversed halo (atoll) sign is strongly suggestive of the diagnosis of angioinvasive aspergillosis, and treatment is usually initiated, without recourse to biopsy.
Other entities to be considered if demographics, presentation, or imaging is atypical include:other types of pulmonary infectionpulmonary hemorrhagepulmonary metastasesother causes of the air crescent signother causes of the reversed halo sign

Angiolipomas (also sometimes known as haemangiolipomas, vascular lipomas, and fibromyolipomas) are rare soft tissue tumors composed of mature adipocytes and vessels.
They can occur essentially anywhere and can be subclassified into infiltrating and non-infiltrating variants 1.
Please refer to the epidural (spinal) angiolipoma article for a specific discussion.
The remainder of this article describes the general features of peripheral angiolipomas.
EpidemiologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresTypically occur in young adults, appearing on the forearm (most common location), trunk and upper arm.
They are more common in males.
The most common presentation is of multiple, small (<2 cm), subcutaneous, tender nodules 2,3.Infiltrating angiolipomas are much rarer than the non-infiltrating variant.
They occur in children and adults and have no sex predilection.
They most commonly appear in the muscles of the lower extremity, neck, and shoulder, and are usually painless 5.As expected, these masses contain adipose tissue with prominent vascular supply.
Infiltrating angiolipoma is nonencapsulated and can contain phleboliths, heterotopic bone, and calcium salts.
There are authors who conclude that it should be classified as an "intramuscular hemangioma" 2,4.Appear as well-circumscribed, homogeneous hyperechoic masses 5,6.Angiolipomas demonstrate signal intensity characteristics of mature adipose tissue.
Vascular elements are T1-hypointense and T2 hyperintense and enhance vividly following administration of contrast 3.Catheter angiography demonstrates prominent coarse neovascularity.
During the capillary phase, contrast staining is typically seen 1.Treatment is predominantly surgical, although infiltrating tumors are difficult to completely excise 1 and, as mentioned above, tend to recur locally.
2angiomyolipoma

Angiomatous meningiomas are a rare histological variant of WHO grade I meningiomas and account for only 2.1% of all meningiomas 1,3.
The epidemiology and clinical presentation of these tumors do not clearly deviate from that of more common histological variants of meningiomas and is thus not repeated here.
TerminologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresUnfortunately, the main differential for an angiomatous meningioma is a hemangiopericytoma, which used to be considered a variant of meningioma and went by the annoyingly similar name of "angioblastic meningioma".
Angiomatous meningiomas, as their name suggests, demonstrate abundant blood vessels (greater than 50% of a whole tumor) within a tumor with areas of classic meningothelial differentiation 1.
They are considered WHO grade I tumors and cellular atypia and anaplasia is not present 3.The appearance of angiomatous meningiomas on CT is similar to that of more typical meningothelial and fibrous subtypes, appearing as slightly hyperdense to adjacent brain parenchyma and exhibiting vivid contrast enhancement 1.On MRI angiomatous meningiomas can be difficult to distinguish from microcystic meningiomas and chordoid meningiomas other than the presence of often prominent flow voids.
They frequently have obvious dural tails and not infrequently demonstrate some cystic change 1.Typically they exhibit the following signal characteristics 1:T1: hypointense compared to grey matterT1 C+: vivid enhancementT2hyperintense compared to grey matterperitumoral edema very common (75-100%) 2prominent flow voidsDWI / ADC: facilitated diffusionMRA: in some cases, feeding vessels may be visible 1 hyperintense compared to grey matterperitumoral edema very common (75-100%) 2prominent flow voidsAlthough surgery is the mainstay of treatment, as is the case for other variants, the presence of such abundant blood supply can make surgery more difficult.
As such pre-operative embolization may be of benefit.
Other entities to be considered predominantly are extra-axial masses with high T2 signal and masses with prominent blood supply.
These include:hemangiopericytomacan appear very similarless likely to have a dural tail 4more likely to enhance heterogeneously 4more likely to have microlobulation / irregular contour 4perhaps counterintuitively ADC values are higher than in angiomatous meningiomas 4bone and brain invasion more commonsomewhat more common in younger males (vs. older females)other meningioma variants which usually do not have as prominent flow voidsmicrocystic meningiomachordoid meningiomasecretory meningiomaangiomatous meningiomacartilaginous metaplastic meningiomahemangioblastomaintra-axial (albeit peripheral) usually in the posterior fossatypically cyst with an enhancing mural nodulecan appear very similarless likely to have a dural tail 4more likely to enhance heterogeneously 4more likely to have microlobulation / irregular contour 4perhaps counterintuitively ADC values are higher than in angiomatous meningiomas 4bone and brain invasion more commonsomewhat more common in younger males (vs. older females)microcystic meningiomachordoid meningiomasecretory meningiomaangiomatous meningiomacartilaginous metaplastic meningiomaintra-axial (albeit peripheral) usually in the posterior fossatypically cyst with an enhancing mural nodule

Angiomyofibroblastoma-like tumor of the scrotum is a rare, well-defined, slow growing mesenchymal extratesticular nonepididymal tumor rarely seen in the perineum or scrotum of older male patients.
A similar tumor can occur in females in the vulval region.
Epidemiology PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatmentDifferential diagnosisReferencesIn males, they are seen in middle aged to elderly patients between age 45 and 75.
In the majority of cases it has an indolent and nonaggressive clinical course; however, focal invasion and recurrence have been reported.
These tumors appear as superficial well-circumscribed masses with a greyish white to yellowish brown color.
Angiomyofibroblastoma-like tumors of the scrotum demonstrate high vascularity and perivascular fibrinoid hyalinisation.
The tumor cells are spindle cells with minimal atypia and a low mitotic rate.
A small amount of fat is seen in 25-56% of cases.
Positive for vimentin and negative for S100, actin, and CD34.Heterogeneous echotexture, isoechoic to the surrounding tissue and subcutaneous fat.
Well-circumscribed homogeneous subcutaneous oval mass, possibly with several small internal hypodense foci.
T1: low due to high fibrous contentT2: intermediate heterogeneous signalIntense postcontrast enhancement due to high vascularity of the lesions.
Treatment is wide surgical resection to reduce recurrence rate.
In the scrotum, the differential includes rare lesions such as:spindle lipoma of the scrotumliposarcoma of the scrotumsolitary fibrous tumor of the scrotumleiomyoma of the scrotumaggressive angiomyxoma of the scrotum

Angiomyolipomas (AMLs)  refer to hamartomatous lesions composed of abnormal, thick-walled vessels (i.e. angio) and varying amounts of smooth muscle–like cells (i.e. myo) and adipose tissue (i.e. lipoma) They predominantly occur in the kidney (renal angiomyolipoma) but occasionally occur in other organs such as the liver (hepatic angiomyolipoma).

Angiosarcoma of bone is a malignant vascular tumor of bone.
These are rare and account for less than 1% of malignant bone tumors.
The majority of these tumors arising in bone are primary; however, a tiny percentage are either radiation-induced or associated with bone infarctionEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic features Treatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesMost common in young individuals.
Males are more commonly affected than females.
Although there is no particular clinical presentation, the majority of the patients present with a chronic dull pain and/or tumor mass.
Other presentations includeassociated neurological deficitspathological fractures - raremost common sites are short and long tubular bones of extremities 2femur - 23%tibia - 18%humerus - 13%pelvis - 7%femur - 23%tibia - 18%humerus - 13%pelvis - 7%Angiosarcomas can be unifocal or multifocal, with one study citing that up to one-third can be multifocal 4.They are usually purely lytic, eccentric and occur in a metadiaphyseal location.
They can have a very aggressive appearance, without a periosteal reaction and less soft tissue extension.
Can occur as multiple lesions in same bone.
Metastatic lesions to other skeletal sites may be seen.
In general very poor prognosis and depends on location and extent.
Treatment options include:wide surgical excision limb-sparing surgeryradiotherapyPossible differential considerations include:metastatic carcinoma to boneother malignant vascular tumors of bone -hemangiopericytoma of bone - not possible to differentiate radiologically 2hemangioendothelioma of bone - not possible to differentiate radiologically 2hemangiopericytoma of bone - not possible to differentiate radiologically 2hemangioendothelioma of bone - not possible to differentiate radiologically 2angiosarcomamusculoskeletal angiosarcomamusculoskeletal angiosarcoma

Angiosarcoma involving the lung includes:metastatic angiosarcoma to lung 1 commonerusual primary sites include the heart and breast 2primary pulmonary angiosarcoma: very rarecommonerusual primary sites include the heart and breast 2angiosarcoma

Breast angiosarcomas are a rare vascular breast malignancy.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAs primary tumors of the breast, they account for ~0.04% 2 of all breast cancers and tend to occur in younger women, in their 3rd to 4th decades.
Secondary angiosarcoma, related to prior therapy of breast cancer, has an estimated incidence of ~0.09-0.16% and occurs in older women (peak age 6th decade 2).The classic presentation is a painless localized blue or purple color change of the breast skin, with singular or multifocal lesions which may resemble other benign vascular lesions such as angioma or telangiectasis 9,10.Patients may also present with swelling, a sensation of fullness, or rapid breast growth 10.The tumors are of endovascular origin.
There are two main types:primary angiosarcoma of the breast secondary angiosarcoma of the breastradiation-induced angiosarcoma: can occur following breast irradiationlymphedema-associated cutaneous angiosarcomaradiation-induced angiosarcoma: can occur following breast irradiationlymphedema-associated cutaneous angiosarcomaSpecific location of the tumor varies according to whether it is a primary or secondary lesion:primary breast angiosarcoma are thought to arise within the breast parenchyma, with secondary involvement of the skin 11secondary breast angiosarcoma mainly involve the skin, with or without involvement of underlying breast parenchyma 11prior breast irradiation: radiation-induced breast angiosarcomas tend to occur after a significant latent period post-radiation (~5 years)Stewart-Treves syndromeLesions can sometimes be occult on mammography 7.A heterogeneous mass is usually seen on MRI.
Reported signal characteristics include 7:T1: usually low signal intensityT2: usually high signal intensityC+ (Gd): low-grade lesions show progressive enhancement whereas high-grade lesions show rapid enhancement and washoutAngiosarcoma of the breast is an extremely aggressive tumor and is associated with a poor prognosis.
The tumor may be mis-diagnosed on the basis of fine-needle biopsy; thus, core biopsy is mandatory for diagnosis 12.Surgical excision with wide margin is the standard of care, typically a mastectomy.
Axillary nodal dissection is usually not performed, as the malignancy features haematogenous spread.
Despite aggressive surgery, there is a high local and distant recurrence rate.

Angiosarcomas of the spleen are rare malignant splenic neoplasms.
The term is usually given to describe a primary angiosarcoma of the spleen although angiosarcoma elsewhere can also rarely metastasize to the spleen.
Despite its absolute rarity, a splenic angiosarcoma is considered the most common primary non-hematolymphoid splenic malignancy 2,17.EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesThe general consensus is that there is no recognized gender predilection (occurs almost equally in females and males) 1,17.
Occasional publications, however, suggest a slight male predilection 4.
Commonly seen in older patients, with the peak incidence is thought to be around the 6th decade.
Clinical symptomatology can be highly variable, often posing difficult diagnostic problems.
Macroscopic examination often shows splenomegaly with cut sections revealing discrete lesions in a majority of cases.
These can range from well-circumscribed firm nodules to poorly delineated foci of necrosis and hemorrhage associated with cystic spaces.
Microscopically, the tumors are often heterogeneous.
The lesions typically demonstrate focal vasoformative component lined by atypical endothelial cells.
Solid sarcomatous, papillary, and epithelioid growth patterns can be observed.
Unlike with primary hepatic angiosarcoma, there is no known association between splenic angiosarcoma and occupational exposure to chemicals, such as vinyl chloride or arsenic, or prior injection with the contrast agent thorium dioxide 4.Reported sonographic features include splenomegaly with largely heterogeneous echotexture, including cystic and solid components 4,17.
Increased vascularity on Doppler is commonly present 17.
CT may show solitary or multiple nodular masses of heterogeneous low attenuation in an enlarged spleen; necrosis and hemorrhagic areas may account for the heterogeneity 17.
There is generally irregular and poorly defined contours 16.Occasional large subcapsular intrasplenic or perisplenic extracapsular blood collections (hemoperitoneum) may be present.
Some of these masses may show peripheral enhancement with the margins of the lesions often irregular or poorly defined.
Less frequently, CT scans may show a moderate splenomegaly with a micronodular involvement of the organ 16.pre-contrast CT: the tumors may appear hyperattenuating due to components of acute hemorrhagedynamic contrast-enhanced CT scans: the lesions may exhibit substantial peripheral contrast enhancement similar to that of hepatic hemangiomas 4Reported MRI features include:T1 and T2:nodular hypointense (relative to the normal adjacent splenic parenchyma) masses on both T1- and T2-weighted imageslarge masses with increased signal intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images that are likely related to areas of subacute hemorrhage, as well as tumor necrosisareas of decreased signal intensity within the tumor, owing to chronic hemorrhage with hemosiderin depositionC+ (Gd): usually shows intense and multinodular (heterogenous 15) enhancement with focal areas of non-enhancement, likely representing intratumoral hemorrhage and necrosisnodular hypointense (relative to the normal adjacent splenic parenchyma) masses on both T1- and T2-weighted imageslarge masses with increased signal intensity on both T1- and T2-weighted images that are likely related to areas of subacute hemorrhage, as well as tumor necrosisareas of decreased signal intensity within the tumor, owing to chronic hemorrhage with hemosiderin depositionIt is an extremely aggressive fatal neoplasm at is almost universally fatal (median survival at approximately 24-36 months at the time of initial writing11) despite treatment 3,5.
Distant metastases occur most frequently in the liver (approximately 70% of cases), lung, pleural lymph nodes, bone, and brain.
Prompt splenectomy prior to splenic rupture may improve survival 5.spontaneous splenic rupture 2,4: can occur in up to 30% of cases 4It was first described in 1879 by T Langhans 1.General imaging differential considerations include vascular splenic lesions such as:splenic hemangiomaLittoral cell angioma of spleenlymphangioma of spleenhemangiopericytoma of spleenangiosarcoma - generalsplenic lesions and anomalies

Angiosarcomas (like hemangiopericytomas and hemangioendotheliomas) are tumors that arise from vascular structures.
They are typically difficult to distinguish from one another on imaging alone.
Angiosarcomas, are the most aggressive of the three, frequently having metastases at the time of diagnosis (and therefore carrying an extremely poor prognosis), and often having local recurrences.
They account for less than 1% of all sarcomas and are more frequently seen in males (M:F = 2:1) except when seen in the setting of post-mastectomy lymphedema which is clearly more common in women and is known as Stewart-Treves syndrome.
The malignant cells express morphological and functional properties of endothelial cells.
The tumors can be multicentric with hemorrhage and necrosis being common.hepatic angiosarcoma 2breast angiosarcoma 5cutaneous angiosarcoma 3musculoskeletal angiosarcomaangiosarcoma of bonecardiac angiosarcomaprimary angiosarcoma of spleenpulmonary angiosarcoma (can be primary or metastatic) 4angiosarcoma of boneStewart-Treves syndrome

The angle of the longitudinal arch (calcaneal–fifth metatarsal angle) is one of the angles drawn on the weight-bearing lateral foot radiograph.
The angle is formed between the calcaneal inclination axis and a line drawn along the inferior edge of the 5th metatarsal:pes planus: >170°normal: 150-170°pes cavus: <150°

Angular artery (facial artery)Angular artery (MCA branch)Angular is derived from the Latin root in angulus (for corner).

The angular artery (MCA branch) is an M4 branch of middle cerebral artery. (
It is not the same as the facial artery angular artery branch.)The artery arises from the posterior part of the Sylvian fissure and runs posteriorly.
On lateral angiogram it forms a downward concave curve while transversing Heschl's transverse gyrus.
The angular artery usually supplies angular and supramarginal gyrus, but can present some branches to the parietal and temporo-occipital areas.

The angular artery is the terminal branch of the facial artery.
It becomes the angular artery after the lateral nasal artery branch from the facial artery.
It courses superiorly along the lateral border of the external nose to the medial canthus.
It is accompanied by the angular vein which drains into the facial vein.
This should not be confused with the terminal ACM branch with the same name (Angular artery (MCA branch)).

The angular gyrus is a portion of the parietal lobe of the brain.
It is one of the two parts of the inferior parietal lobule, the other part being the supramarginal gyrus.
It plays a part in language and number processing, memory and reasoning 1.Gross anatomyBlood supplyRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIt lies as a horseshoe shaped gyrus capping the angular sulcus, a continuation of the upswing of the superior temporal sulcus.
It is bound by the intraparietal sulcus superiorly, parieto-occipital sulcus caudally and supramarginal gyrus rostrally.
It is supplied by the middle cerebral artery.
The angular gyrus sign 2 suggests that the gyrus capping the posterior end of the superior temporal sulcus is the angular gyrus.
This sulcus can be identified as it lies in parallel with the lateral sulcus.
Damage to the angular gyrus has been shown to cause agraphia, alexia, Gerstmann syndrome and behavioral changes3.

The angular interface sign is used to characterize an exophytic renal mass, in which the exophytic renal mass has an angular interface with the renal parenchyma.
In other words, the exophytic lesion has a tapered pyramidal contour or definite apex within the renal parenchyma.
Due to its high sensitivity and specificity, the angular interface sign is a strong predictor to identify lesions as either cysts, benign tumors, or as angiomyolipomas.
It very rarely occurs with malignant lesions as renal cell carcinoma usually has a rounded interface with the renal parenchyma.
It has high utility in differentiating between lipid-poor angiomyolipomas and renal cell carcinomas which contain intracellular lipids.

Angular pregnancies are those in which implantation occurs eccentrically along the fundus of the endometrial cavity, along with the lateral upper angle or cornua of the uterus.
In contrast to interstitial tubal pregnancy, angular pregnancies have a more medial location and are considered an intrauterine implantation.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential DiagnosisReferencesThe term "angular pregnancy" is sometimes used interchangeably with "cornual pregnancy".
This causes some ambiguity and the latter is best reserved for a pregnancy within a congenitally-anomalous uterus, such as one of the horns of a bicornuate, or the rudimentary corn of a unicornuate uterus.
It is a rare type of pregnancy, associated with high rates of spontaneous abortion, uterine rupture, and placenta accreta.
Given the intrauterine location of angular pregnancies and the enveloping myometrium, these patients are likely to present with symptoms later than patients with ectopic pregnancies.
Angular pregnancy occurs when the blastocyst is implanted in the lateral angle of the endometrial cavity, medial to the uterotubal junction and round ligament 1.
In contrast, an interstitial ectopic pregnancy is located more laterally within the interstitial segment of the Fallopian tube which courses within the myometrial wall.
The distinction is important because the developing embryo ovum of an interstitial pregnancy develops in the uterine wall, whereas in angular pregnancy it develops eccentrically within the endometrial cavity and may be constrained within the cornua 1.3D ultrasound can be helpful in the precise location of the sacpregnancy is eccentrically high in location; the gestational sac is located within the endometrial cavity at the lateral upper angle on the spectrum between normal pregnancy and interstitial cornual pregnanciesshould always have normal myometrial coverage, which is thick and usually more than 5 mmgrows towards the endometrial cavity and requires close follow-up to document the gestational sac growing into the cavityMany of these pregnancies result in live birth but have an increased complication rate.
The true complication rate not known as cases reported as angular may have actually been interstitial but complications include:spontaneous abortion (~40%)uterine rupture (~15%)interstitial ectopic pregnancylocated in the intramural portion of Fallopian tubealso eccentrically located with respect to endometrial cavity but seen separately >1 cm from the endometrial cavityinterstitial line sign: an echogenic line in continuity from the ectopic to the endometrial echo complexcovered by myometrium but thinned to <5 mmcan grow to a larger size than the tubal ectopic pregnancy cornual pregnancypresents in settings of a uterine anomaly such as unicornuate, bicornuate, or septate uterus with a rudimentary horngestational sac is located medial to the Fallopian tube including the anomalous partlocated in the intramural portion of Fallopian tubealso eccentrically located with respect to endometrial cavity but seen separately >1 cm from the endometrial cavityinterstitial line sign: an echogenic line in continuity from the ectopic to the endometrial echo complexcovered by myometrium but thinned to <5 mmcan grow to a larger size than the tubal ectopic pregnancy presents in settings of a uterine anomaly such as unicornuate, bicornuate, or septate uterus with a rudimentary horngestational sac is located medial to the Fallopian tube including the anomalous part

The angular vein drains the anterior region of the scalp 1.
It is formed by the union of the supratrochlear and supraorbital veins and becomes the facial vein 1,2,3.The angular vein is formed at the medial canthus as the supratrochlear vein and supraorbital vein unite 1,2.
The angular vein runs obliquely downward along with the angular artery, on the side of the root of the nose, to the level of the lower margin of the orbit, where it becomes the facial vein (previously called the anterior facial vein) 2.

Anhydramnios is a term where there is a complete or near-complete lack of amniotic fluid (sometimes referred to as "liquor volume").PathologyRadiographic featuresComplicationsSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesAnhydramnios can result in a number of situations:fetal renal tract anomaliesPotter syndrome (bilateral renal agenesis): most common large ureterocoele: if capable of causing bilateral renal tract obstruction 6posterior urethral valves: with severe/complete obstruction 1preterm premature rupture of membranes (PPROM)placental insufficiency 4silent uterine rupture 4nimesulide therapy (single report only 5)chemotherapeutic agents administered during pregnancytrastuzumab/paclitaxel 3Potter syndrome (bilateral renal agenesis): most common large ureterocoele: if capable of causing bilateral renal tract obstruction 6posterior urethral valves: with severe/complete obstruction 1trastuzumab/paclitaxel 3Typically shows a complete absence of amniotic fluid around the fetus.
Color Doppler interrogation may be of value in selected cases when loops of cord around the fetus mimic amniotic fluid 2.
However demonstration of vascularity within the same can help differentiate the loops from amniotic fluid.
Visualization of fetal structures can sometimes be very difficult due to the absence of amniotic fluid.fetal akinesia deformation sequence with the development of pulmonary hypoplasia if anhydramnios has been present for a long periodoligohydramnios

Animal and animal produce inspired signs may sound a little silly, but the radiology literature is replete with such signs, some more fanciful than others.
Fish and seafoodBirdsMammalsArthropodsReptilesMicro-organismsMythical creaturesAnimal product foodsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figurescluster of black pearls signendosteal scalloping: medullary cavity masses, e.g. multiple myelomafish vertebra (also known as codfish vertebra): biconcave vertebrae as seen in osteoporosisfishtail deformity of the elbow: due to abnormal trochlear ossification following a distal humeral fracture in childhood fishtail pancreas: rare anatomic variant of the pancreaslobster claw sign of papillary necrosismanta ray sign of bladder exstrophyvertebral scalloping: may be anterior or posterior borderbird beak sign of achalasia (also known as rat tail sign)beak sign of arterial dissection or of sigmoid volvuluseggshell calcification of silicosis and occasionally sarcoidosisgull wing appearance of erosive osteoarthritishummingbird sign or penguin signowl-eyes sign of anterior spinal cord infarction etc.
swan neck deformity of rheumatoid arthritiswinking owl signanteater nose sign of calcaneonavicular coalitionbat's wingpulmonary opacities, e.g. in alveolar edema4th ventricle (Joubert anomaly and related syndromes)bear's paw sign: xanthogranulomatous pyelonephritisbeaver tail liverBrahma bull sign: femoral neck osteochondromabuffalo chest: bilateral pneumothoraces due to abnormal communication between the pleural spacesbull's eye: evoked in the mind's eye by many a pathologybunny waveform sign: Doppler waveform in subclavian steal syndromedog ear sign: fluid/blood in pelvic peritoneal recessdural tail: of meningioma and several other dura-based lesionsears of the lynx sign: hereditary spastic paraplegiaeye of tiger sign: classical of Hallervorden-Spatz syndromefeline esophagus: horizontal striations seen on barium swallows as a variant of normalhidebound sign of gastrointestinal sclerodermajoint mouse: intra-articular loose body resulting from osteochondritis dissecansleather bottle stomach: of linitis plasticaleopard skin sign or tigroid patternmoose head appearance of corpus callosal dysgenesispanda signof the midbrain in Wilson diseaseof sarcoidosispiglet sign of osmotic demyelinationpleural mouseraccoon eyes signrat bite erosions of goutrat tail sign of arterial dissection or of achalasia (also known as bird-beak sign)Scottie dog signstaghorn calculus: struvite renal calculitigroid pattern or leopard skin signwinking owl signzebra sign: remote cerebellar hemorrhagezebra stripe sign: osteogenesis imperfectapulmonary opacities, e.g. in alveolar edema4th ventricle (Joubert anomaly and related syndromes)of the midbrain in Wilson diseaseof sarcoidosisbutterfly fracturebutterfly glioma: glioma crossing midline to the contralateral hemispherebutterfly shape of the grey matter of the spinal cordbutterfly vertebracaterpillar sign: of pyloric stenosisabdominal cocoon: encapsulating peritoneal sclerosisspider web: intrahepatic veins in hepatic venous outflow obstructioncobra head sign of ureterocelesnake-eye appearance: pathology of anterior horns of cervical grey mattersnake eyesappearance of the facial canal in the petrous temporal bonealternative name for owl-eyes sign of spinal cord infarctionsnake sign (or serpent sign)appearance of the facial canal in the petrous temporal bonealternative name for owl-eyes sign of spinal cord infarctionplankton sign: diagnostic on ultrasound of an exudative pleural effusioncyclops lesion: usually post-ACL repairmedusa headof a developmental venous anomaly (DVA) also a sign of severe portal hypertension (i.e. caput medusae)of a developmental venous anomaly (DVA) also a sign of severe portal hypertension (i.e. caput medusae)cervical hamburger sign: normal cervical facet joints on axial CThead cheese sign of hypersensitivity pneumonitishoneycomb lung of UIP/pulmonary fibrosisice cream cone sign of vestibular schwannomamesenteric hamburger sign (also called sandwich sign): mesenteric nodal massomental cake: metastases to omentumsausage digit: underlying inflammatory arthritis or dactylitiswater bottle sign: massive pericardial effusion

Aniridia refers to either the clinical sign of a complete/partial absence of the iris, or more specifically to the disease entity classic aniridia.
Rarely other genetic conditions may cause this sign.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyReferencesClassic aniridia is inherited as an autosomal dominant condition and is seen in ~1 in 50,000 births according to population studies 1.
Classic aniridia tends to be bilateral and usually presents with other ocular abnormalities including foveal (+/-optic nerve) hypoplasia; affected patients are at risk of developing cataracts, glaucoma and/or ptosis.
Although classically a distinction is made between a partial or a complete aniridia, in practice the distinction is usually academic, as on formal testing with gonioscopy - a technique to examine the iridocorneal angle - a small iris stump can always be demonstrated.
classic aniridiaGillespie syndrome: triad of partial aniridia, ataxia and learning disabilityWAGR syndromemultisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction syndromeClassic aniridia is found with various PAX6 loss-of-function mutations 1.
Other genetic loci that have been implicated include FOXC1, PITX2, and/or associated regulatory sequences.
Gillespie syndrome is associated with mutations of the ITPR1 gene 1.
Multisystemic smooth muscle dysfunction syndrome is related to ACTA2 mutations.
WAGR syndrome has been linked to PAX6 and WT1 deletions on chromosome 11p.

Anisocoria is present when an individual's pupils differ in size.
If a person's pupils are symmetric there is said to be isocoria.
The prevalence of transient physiological anisocoria of >0.4 mm is found in up to 20% population.
However persistent anisocoria seems to be rarer, in the same study it was only found in 3% subjects 1.
Most cases are benign, the two diagnoses of concern are third nerve palsy and Horner syndrome, each of which has multiple causes (see individual articles).third nerve palsyHorner syndromemedicationmydriatics (dilating agents) are more commonly the cause than miotics (constricting agents) 3mydriaticsvasoconstrictors, hyoscine, glycopyrrolate antiperspirant, Jimson weed, angel's trumpet, blue nightshademioticsopiates, clonidine, organophosphates, pilocarpine, prostaglandinsphysiologicallocal pathology of the iris (rare) e.g. traumamydriatics (dilating agents) are more commonly the cause than miotics (constricting agents) 3mydriaticsvasoconstrictors, hyoscine, glycopyrrolate antiperspirant, Jimson weed, angel's trumpet, blue nightshademioticsopiates, clonidine, organophosphates, pilocarpine, prostaglandinsvasoconstrictors, hyoscine, glycopyrrolate antiperspirant, Jimson weed, angel's trumpet, blue nightshadeopiates, clonidine, organophosphates, pilocarpine, prostaglandins

Anisotropy is an artefact encountered in ultrasound, notably in muscles and tendons during a musculoskeletal ultrasound.
In musculoskeletal applications, the artefact may prompt an incorrect diagnosis of tendinosis or tendon tear.
When the ultrasound beam is incident on a fibrillar structure as a tendon or a ligament, the organized fibrils may reflect a majority of the insonating sound beam in a direction away from the transducer.
When this occurs, the transducer does not receive the returning echo and assumes that the insonated area should be hypoechoic.
This anisotropic effect is dependent on the angle of the insonating beam.
The maximum return echo occurs when the ultrasound beam is perpendicular to the tendon.
Decreasing the insonating angle on a normal tendon will cause it to change from brightly hyperechoic (the actual echo from tightly bound tendon fibers) to darkly hypoechoic.
If the angle is then increased, the tendon will again appear hyperechoic.
If the artefact causes a normal tendon to appear hypoechoic, it may falsely lead to a diagnosis of tendinosis or tear.
In some situations, anisotropy may be useful in diagnosis.
If a tendon is surrounded by other brightly hyperechoic structures (e.g. fat), then altering the angle of the transducer will cause the tendon to become hypoechoic, differentiating it from the other structures.ultrasound artifacts

Ankle AP view is part of a three view series of the distal tibia, distal fibula, proximal talus and proximal metatarsals.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesCases and figuresthe patient may be supine or sitting upright with their leg straighten on the tablethe foot is in dorsiflexionthe toes will be pointing directly toward the ceilingAP projection centering pointthe midpoint of the lateral and medial malleolicollimationlaterally to the skin marginssuperior to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the proximal aspect of the metatarsalsorientation  portraitdetector size24 cm x 30 cmexposure 50-60 kVp3-5 mAsSID100 cmgridnothe midpoint of the lateral and medial malleolilaterally to the skin marginssuperior to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the proximal aspect of the metatarsalsportrait24 cm x 30 cm50-60 kVp3-5 mAs100 cmnoThe distal fibula should be slightly superimposed the distal tibia.
The lateral and medial malleoli of the distal fibula and tibia are in profile.
The tibiotalar joint space should be open, yet the full mortise joint should not be visualized on the AP.This view can be thought of as the literal anteroposterior of the ankle.
Most patients will naturally place their foot in this position.
Although dorsiflexion is essential in both the AP and the mortise view it should be noted that during trauma this may not be possible.

The ankle horizontal beam lateral view is a modified lateral view part of a three view ankle series; this projection is used to assess the distal tibia and fibula, talus, navicular, cuboid, the base of the 5th metatarsal and calcaneus.
The horizontal beam lateral is a highly adaptable projection that can be used in trauma or with patients who are unable to ambulate to the desired standard lateral position.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesCases and figurespatient is in a supine position if the projection is mediolateral, the non-affected leg is placed on a stand in a flexed position to avoid superposition  if the projection is lateromedial both legs can lay in their natural AP position foot in dorsiflexion if possible mediolateral/lateromedial horizontal beam projection centering pointmediolateral bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibialateromedial bony prominence of the lateral malleolus of the distal tibiacollimationanteriorly from the hindfoot to the extent of the skin margins of the most posterior portion of the calcaneussuperior to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the skin margins of the plantar aspect of the footorientation  portrait or landscape detector size18 cm x 24 cmexposure 50-60 kVp3-5 mAsSID100 cmgridnomediolateral bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibialateromedial bony prominence of the lateral malleolus of the distal tibia bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibiabony prominence of the lateral malleolus of the distal tibiaanteriorly from the hindfoot to the extent of the skin margins of the most posterior portion of the calcaneussuperior to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the skin margins of the plantar aspect of the footportrait or landscape 18 cm x 24 cm50-60 kVp3-5 mAs100 cmnoThe distal fibula should be superimposed by the posterior portion of the distal tibia.
The talar domes should be superimposed allowing for adequate inspection of the superior articular surface of the talus.
The joint space between the distal tibia and the talus is open and uniform.
In situations where the patient cannot be moved this projection be invaluable, it requires little to no patient positioning and can be replicated in ICU wards.
If possible, placing a sponge under the ankle in question will prevent any artefacts from bed/pillows in that are native to trauma rooms.
The projection can be done from either side depending on the makeup of the room and the patients' pathology.
The patient remains supine with an image receptor placed vertically adjacent to the lateral aspect of the upright ankle; the X-ray beam is directed horizontally, centered at the bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibia.
Superior-inferior malalignment of the superior aspect of the talus is resultant of the tibia not lying parallel to the image receptor.
To adjust this, angle the tube superior-inferior to mimic the tibia laying parallel.
This is not ideal but in trauma, it may be the only option.
Anterior-posterior malalignment of the talar domes is due to over or under rotation of the foot.
To adjust this, angle the tube anterior-posterior to mimic correct positioning.
This is not ideal but in trauma, it may be the only option.

Ankle lateral view is part of a three view ankle series; this projection is used to assess the distal tibia and fibula, talus, navicular, cuboid, the base of the 5th metatarsal and calcaneus.
Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical pointsRelated articlesCases and figurespatient is in a lateral recumbent position on the tablethe lateral aspect of the knee and ankle joint should be in contact with the table resulting in the tibia lying parallel to the tablethe leg can be bent or straight foot in dorsiflexion place the opposite leg behind the injured limb to avoid over rotationmediolateral projection centering pointthe bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibiacollimationanteriorly from the hindfoot to extent of the skin margins of the most posterior portion of the calcaneussuperior to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the skin margins of the plantar aspect of the footorientation  portraitdetector size18 cm x 24 cmexposure 50-60 kVp3-5 mAsSID100 cmgridnothe bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibiaanteriorly from the hindfoot to extent of the skin margins of the most posterior portion of the calcaneussuperior to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the skin margins of the plantar aspect of the footportrait18 cm x 24 cm50-60 kVp3-5 mAs100 cmnoThe distal fibula should be superimposed by the posterior portion of the distal tibia.
The talar domes should be superimposed allowing for adequate inspection of the superior articular surface of the talus.
The joint space between the distal tibia and the talus is open and uniform.
Superior-inferior malalignment of the superior aspect of the talus is resultant of the tibia not lying parallel to the image receptor.
To adjust this, either lower the knee to suit the ankle better, or place the ankle on a small sponge to better suit the knee.
Anterior-posterior malalignment of the talar domes is due to over or under rotation of the foot.
To adjust this, check the heel is not raised too far or alternately the toes, if the patient cannot correct this position it can be aided with a small wedge sponge.
In trauma, it may not be possible to place the patient as above, in these cases the same principles can be applied with a modified horizontal beam view.
The patient can remain supine with an image receptor placed vertically adjacent to the lateral aspect of the upright ankle, and the X-ray beam is directed horizontally, centered at the bony prominence of the medial malleolus of the distal tibia.

Ankle AP mortise (mortice is equally correct) view is part of a three view series of the distal tibia, distal fibula, talus and proximal metatarsals.
It is the most pertinent projection for assessing the articulation of the tibial plafond and two malleoli with the talar dome, otherwise known as the mortise joint of the ankle 1,2.Patient positionTechnical factorsImage technical evaluationPractical points Related articlesReferencesCases and figuresthe patient may be supine or sitting upright with the leg straightened on the tablethe leg must be rotated internally 15° to 20°, thus aligning the intermalleolar line parallel to the detector.
This usually results in the 5th toe being directly inline with the center of the calcaneuminternal rotation must be from the hip; isolated rotation of the ankle will result in a non-diagnostic imagefoot should be in slight dorsiflexionAP projection centering pointthe midpoint of the lateral and medial malleolicollimationlaterally to the skin marginssuperiorly to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the proximal aspect of the metatarsalsorientation  portraitdetector size24 cm x 30 cmexposure 50-60 kVp3-5 mAsSID100 cmgridnothe midpoint of the lateral and medial malleolilaterally to the skin marginssuperiorly to examine the distal third of the tibia and fibulainferior to the proximal aspect of the metatarsalsportrait24 cm x 30 cm50-60 kVp3-5 mAs100 cmnoThe lateral and medial malleoli of the distal fibula and tibia, respectively, should be seen in profile.
Uniformity of the mortise joint should be seen without any superimposition of either malleolus.
The base of the 5th metatarsal must be included in the inferior aspect of the image.
In Australia, the mortise view is part of a three-part ankle series, yet in other countries, including the United Kingdom, the mortise view is the primary 'AP projection' of the ankle alongside the lateral projection.
Aligning the 5th  toe to the center of the calcaneus is a practical way to gauge optimal internal rotation needed to demonstrate the mortise joint.
Another way to ensure correct centering is by rotating the leg internally until the central line of the collimation field is in line with the 5th metatarsal.
Often if the foot is not in dorsiflexion, the mortise joint will not be in full profile.
In trauma, it is important to obtain a diagnostic mortise view for the proper assessment of the mortise joint.
Trauma patients may not have the ability to rotate their lower limb internally, in this case, the x-ray beam can be angled 15-20° medially to achieve the view although this will result in some artifactual elongation of structures.

Ankle and foot radiography is the plain radiographic investigation of the distal tibia and fibula, the tarsal bones and metatarsals.
Radiographic examination of the foot and ankle are often requested together, however, there is a plethora of literature to aid in the correct request of x-ray examinations in this region including the Ottawa ankle rules.
The standard ankle series comprises the following:AP projectionmortise projectionlateral projectionThe standard foot series comprises the following:DP projectionoblique projection lateral projection

Ankle brachial index (ABI) is a means of detecting and quantifying peripheral arterial disease (PAD).
It can be performed in conjunction with ultrasound for better results.
IndicationsProcedureRadiographic featuresOutcomesReferencesCases and figuresMany patients with peripheral arterial disease may be asymptomatic (20-50%), but they may also present withlimb pain / claudicationcritical limb ischemiachest painblood pressure cuffpulse volume recording (PVR) Doppler ultrasoundgrayscale duplex Doppler can be useful to map the arterial disease and problem solve for mapping, evaluate the iliac arteries, common femoral arteries, the proximal, mid, and distal femoral arteries, popliteal artery, and the tibial and peroneal artery runoffsevaluated acceleration times, velocities, and waveforms in the segmentsfor mapping, evaluate the iliac arteries, common femoral arteries, the proximal, mid, and distal femoral arteries, popliteal artery, and the tibial and peroneal artery runoffsevaluated acceleration times, velocities, and waveforms in the segmentsA blood pressure cuff or ultrasound is used to evaluate the pressure in the brachial artery in both arms and the anterior and posterior tibial arteries in both legs.
The higher of the two brachial artery pressures is used for the index.
The higher of the anterior or posterior tibial artery pressures is used for the index.
The index is a ratio of the pressure in the highest ankle artery / the highest brachial artery1.0-1.4: normal0.91-0.99 borderline≤0.9: abnormal (i.e. PAD)0.4-0.9: mild-to-moderate PAD<0.4: suggestive of severe PAD 60.4-0.9: mild-to-moderate PAD<0.4: suggestive of severe PAD 6There is a special category for an index 1.3-1.4 or above.
These vessels are considered "non-compressible", and this is either because the arteries are very healthy or because there is heavy arteriolosclerotic or atherosclerotic calcification in the artery, preventing compression.
The ultrasound waveform of the artery helps differentiate between these possibilities.
ABI values correlate with morbidity and mortality of not only the affected lower limb but also with cardiovascular risk 2:ABI <0.90: 10% chance of a cardiac event in 5 yearsABI <0.70: ~20% chance of a cardiac event in 5 years

Ankle fractures account for ~10% of fractures encountered in trauma, preceded only in incidence by proximal femoral fractures in the lower limb.
They have a bimodal presentation, involving young males and older females.
Ankle injuries play a major part in post multitrauma functional impairment thereby necessitating a detailed evaluation.
ClassificationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesThe first classification system was proposed by Percival Pott 3, describing fractures in terms of malleoli involved: unimalleolar, bimalleolar and trimalleolar.
Despite its ease to identify fractures and decreased inter/intra observer variability, it has been superseded by two systems of classification which takes into consideration the rotational mechanism of injury and the stability of the fracture; each has its own advantages and disadvantages:Lauge-Hansen classification 4Danis-Weber classification 5An approach to reading ankle radiograph can be read here.
Results following the anatomic reduction of a displaced ankle fracture are good.
Post-traumatic arthritis has been reported in ~15% of patients despite an anatomic reduction, likely due to chondral injury 6.

There are several ankle impingement syndromes.
They are characterized by limited range of motion and pain on attempting specific movements about the joint and often in a load-bearing position.
They have variable etiology and pathogenesis.
They are best classified according to location.
The key ankle impingement syndromes are:anterolateral impingement syndromeanterior impingement syndromeanteromedial impingementposteromedial impingementposterior impingement syndromewhile there is no posterolateral impingement syndrome, there is a similar condition termed extra-articular lateral hindfoot impingement syndrome (ELHIS)

The ankle joint (also known as the tibiotalar joint or talocrural joint) forms the articulation between the foot and the leg.
It is a primary hinge synovial joint lined with hyaline cartilage.
Gross anatomyNerve supplyBlood supplyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe ankle joint is comprised of the tibia, fibula and talus as well as the supporting ligaments, muscles and neurovascular bundles.
It carries the weight of the body and can undergo a myriad of pathology, most commonly traumatic injuries of the medial and lateral malleoli.
The tibia extends inferiorly to articulate with the talus on its medial aspect which has an inferior projection at its medial aspect, the medial malleolus.
The fibula has a similar inferior projection laterally, the lateral malleolus.
The tibia has a partially curved surface to articulate with the talar dome which is wide anteriorly and narrows posteriorly.
The talus lies superior to the calcaneus and articulates with the navicular anteriorly.
The ligaments of the ankle form a medial and lateral group each comprising of three main ligaments.
The deltoid ligament is medial and is made of two parts.
The deep parts is the tibiotalar part.
The superficial triangular (delta) part is a continuous band projecting from the apex of the medial malleolus to the medial tubercle of the talus, the sustentaculum tali of the calcaneus and the tuberosity of the navicular.
With fusion with the spring ligament also.
The lateral ligaments include the anterior and posterior talofibular ligament and the calcaneofibular ligament.
These ligaments fuse with the joint capsule to enclose the joint so any fracture involving the joint will invoke an ankle effusion.
The interosseous tibiofibular ligament between the fibula and tibia is another important structure maintaining ankle stability.
In the subtalar region the spring ligament (calcaneonavicular) maintains the integrity of the region.
There is an anterolateral, posteromedial and lateral compartment of the ankle typically superficial to the joint.
The posteromedial compartment, in order of anterior to posterior has the tendons of tibialis posterior and flexor digitorum longus, the posterior tibial artery, the tibial nerve and flexor hallucis longus tendon.
The anterior compartment under the extensor retinaculum is the tibialis anterior tendon, extensor hallucis longus tendon, dorsalis pedis artery, deep peroneal nerve, extensor digitorum longus tendon.
In the peroneal compartment consists of peroneus longus, peroneus brevis, the sural nerve and the terminal branch of peroneal artery.
The anteromedial superficial area is the long saphenous vein and saphenous nerve.
Superficial to the peroneal compartment is the sural nerve and small saphenous vein.tibial nervedeep peroneal nerveanterior and posterior tibial arteriesperoneal artery

Ankle radiographs are frequently performed in emergency departments, usually, after trauma, the radiographic series is comprised of three views: an anteroposterior, mortise, and a lateral.
They may be performed to assess degenerative or inflammatory arthritis as well as to look for the sequela of local infection.
AnatomySystematic reviewCommon pathologyDon’t miss…Related articlesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe ankle is a synovial joint composed of the distal tibia and fibula as they articulate with the talus.
The distal tibia and fibula articulate with each other at the distal tibiofibular joint which is more commonly referred to as the tibiofibular syndesmosis (or simply the syndesmosis).On the radiograph, the horizontal portion of the distal tibia parallel to the dome of the talus is the tibial plafond.
Taken with the medial and lateral malleoli, it forms a rectangular socket, the ankle mortise.
Being a synovial joint, the ankle joint (between the ankle mortise and talar dome) is surrounded by a joint capsule.
Like the knee joint capsule, the ankle capsule has an additional cranial extension at the syndesmosis.
Like all joints, structural integrity is achieved by the ligaments that hold it together.
The ankle has three main sets of ligaments:medial: deltoid ligamentlateral: posterior talofibular, anterior talofibular and calcaneofibular ligamentssyndesmotic ligamentThe deltoid ligament is much stronger than the ligaments that support the lateral aspect of the ankle and this results in a relative difference between the degree of pronation and supination that can be achieved.
The ankle is most at risk of injury when it is pronated or supinated.
Pronation is relatively limited because of the shape of the medial malleolus and the deltoid ligament.
This explains why only 20% of injuries occur in pronation compared to 80% when the foot is supinated.
The ring structure of the ankle is made up of three bones (tibia, fibula and talus) and three ligaments (medial and lateral collateral ligaments and interosseous ligament)if there is one break in the ring, look for a secondtrace around the distal tibia and fibula on both viewsfractures may be accompanied by ligamentous injury and may be unstableon the lateral view carefully look at the fibulaan oblique fibula fracture may be difficult to seefractures may be accompanied by ligamentous injury and may be unstablean oblique fibula fracture may be difficult to seetrace around the mortise and talar domecheck the joint space is uniformif one side is widened, look for a fractureensure the talar dome surface is smoothif there is a defect or cortical irregularity, think osteochondral fractureassess the interosseous ligament1 cm proximal to the tibial plafond, the distance between tibia and fibula should be less than 6 mmif > 6 mm, think tear or rupture of ankle ligaments and look for a fractureif one side is widened, look for a fractureif there is a defect or cortical irregularity, think osteochondral fracture1 cm proximal to the tibial plafond, the distance between tibia and fibula should be less than 6 mmif > 6 mm, think tear or rupture of ankle ligaments and look for a fracturetrace the bony cortex of the lateral and medial malleoli, posterior tibia, calcaneum and base of 5th metatarsalassess Bohler’s angle: two tangent lines drawn across the anterior and posterior borders of the calcaneus form an angle measuring 20-40°if < 20°, think calcaneal fractureconfirm with axial viewif < 20°, think calcaneal fractureconfirm with axial viewAs with all films, check around each bone on the film looking at the cortex.
Specifically, check the tarsals and the base of 5th metatarsal.
Beware of accessory ossicles - do not misdiagnose as fractures:os trigonum (posterior to talus)os subtibiale (distal to the tip of medial malleolus)os subfibulare (distal to the tip of lateral malleolus)isolated lateral malleolar fractures are commonthe Weber classification is used to determine treatmentWeber A: below the ankle joint with intact syndesmosisWeber B: at the level of the ankle joint Weber C: above the ankle joint with medial malleolus fracturemore: lateral malleolar fractureWeber A: below the ankle joint with intact syndesmosisWeber B: at the level of the ankle joint Weber C: above the ankle joint with medial malleolus fracturedistal tibiofibular syndesmosis disruptionassociated medial malleolar fracture, medial collateral ligament rupture AND proximal fibular fracturethe result of traumatic external rotationcomplex, unstable injurymore: Maisonneuve fracturedistal tibial fracturecompression injury usually after a fall from a heightcheck for associated talar or calcaneal fracturemore: pilon fracture60% of all tarsal fractures; majority intra-articularfall from height (Lover’s fracture)Bohler’s angle < 20° indicates fracturemore: calcaneal fracturemost common fracture of the talusforced dorsiflexion with axial loadhigh risk of avascular necrosis and degenerative arthritismore: talar neck fractureTillaux fracture: Salter-Harris type III fracture of tibiaTriplane fracture: Salter-Harris type IV fracture of tibia.
Most common fracture in adolescence.
focal areas of damage to cartilage and adjacent subchondral boneoccur secondary to compressive or rotational microtraumacommonly affects talar dome; subtle therefore frequently missedmore: osteochondral fracture

The ankle radiograph checklist is just one of the many pathology checklists that can be used when reporting to ensure that you always actively exclude pathology that is commonly missed; this is particularly helpful in the examination setting, e.g. the FRCR 2B rapid-reporting.
The majority of ankle radiographs in an exam setting will have been performed because of a history of pain or trauma.toddler fracturetriplane fractureBrodie abscesshidden fibula fracturetalar dome fracturetalar neck fracturejoint wideningosteochondritis dissecanscalcaneal fracture - abnormal Bohler anglebase of 5th metatarsal fractureankle radiograph (an approach)

The ankle series is comprised of an anteroposterior (AP), mortise and lateral radiograph.
The series is often used in emergency departments to evaluate the distal tibia, distal fibula, and the talus; forming the ankle joint.
See approach to an ankle series.
Ankle radiographs are performed for a variety of indications including 2-6: ankle traumabony tenderness at the posterior edge or the tip of the lateral malleolusbony tenderness at the posterior edge or the tip medial malleolusinability to weight bearnon-traumatic ankle painAPdemonstrates the ankle in the natural anatomical positionmortise view AP with the foot internally rotated around 10° internal rotation projects the fibula off the medial tibial plafond resulting uniformity of the joint space allowing for assessment of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis 3the base of the 5th metatarsal must be includedlateralprojection 90° to the mortise viewdemonstrates the calcaneum and talus in full profilemust include the base of the 5th metatarsaldemonstrates the ankle in the natural anatomical positionAP with the foot internally rotated around 10° internal rotation projects the fibula off the medial tibial plafond resulting uniformity of the joint space allowing for assessment of the distal tibiofibular syndesmosis 3the base of the 5th metatarsal must be includedprojection 90° to the mortise viewdemonstrates the calcaneum and talus in full profilemust include the base of the 5th metatarsalhorizontal beam lateral a modified projection 90° to the mortise viewdemonstrates the calcaneus and talus in full profile without any limb movement must include the base of the 5th metatarsala modified projection 90° to the mortise viewdemonstrates the calcaneus and talus in full profile without any limb movement must include the base of the 5th metatarsalIf an isolated distal tibial medial malleolus fracture is noted or a significant widening of the mortise joint a knee series should be performed to rule out a combination spiral fracture of the proximal fibula.
Internal or external stress can be conducted to assess for the dynamic widening of the syndesmosis indicating ligamentous injury.

An ankle x-ray, also known as ankle series or ankle radiograph, is a set of two x-rays of the ankle joint.
It is performed to look for evidence of injury (or pathology) affecting the ankle, often after trauma.
This is a summary article.
For more information, you can read a more in-depth reference article: ankle series.indicationsankle trauma with suspicion of bony injuryprocedureAP and lateral views of the ankleAP view performed at a slight angle to open up the mortisesimilar teststib/fib x-rayspecific test looking for isolated tibia/fibula injuryfoot x-rayx-ray of the foot only, not including the ankleankle trauma with suspicion of bony injuryAP and lateral views of the ankleAP view performed at a slight angle to open up the mortiseAP view performed at a slight angle to open up the mortisetib/fib x-rayspecific test looking for isolated tibia/fibula injuryfoot x-rayx-ray of the foot only, not including the anklespecific test looking for isolated tibia/fibula injuryx-ray of the foot only, not including the ankle

Thoracic manifestations of ankylosing spondylitis can be varied.
For a general discussion of the condition refer to the parent article on ankylosing spondylitis.
It can affect the tracheobronchial tree and the lung parenchyma, and the disease spectrum includes:upper lobe fibrocystic changes - fibrobullous diseaseearly involvement may be unilateral or asymmetricalmost cases eventually consist of bilateral apical fibrobullous lesionsmost can be progressive with coalescence of the nodulesformation of cysts and cavities, fibrosis, and bronchiectasis can occurlung nodules (uncommon)pleural thickening (uncommon)effects of chest wall restrictionearly involvement may be unilateral or asymmetricalmost cases eventually consist of bilateral apical fibrobullous lesionsmost can be progressive with coalescence of the nodulesformation of cysts and cavities, fibrosis, and bronchiectasis can occur

Ankylosing spondylitis (less commonly known as Bechterew disease and Marie Strümpell disease) is a seronegative spondyloarthropathy, which results in fusion (ankylosis) of the spine and sacroiliac (SI) joints, although involvement is also seen in large and small joints.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisTraditionally it was thought there was a male predilection of 3:1 or more, however the gender predilection of the disease is a matter of recent debate and research (females may be under-diagnosed).
According to some research men tend towards more severe disease 28.
The disease usually manifests in young adults, with the first symptoms becoming evident in the third decade, although up to 18% of cases manifest in the second decade.
Patients are rheumatoid factor (RF) negative hence seronegative.
HLA B27 is the gene with the strongest association.
Other possibly contributing genes include ERAP-1, IL23R and TNF-associated genes 22.
Although approximately 90% of Caucasian individuals with ankylosing spondylitis have the HLA-B27 gene, it is important to note this gene is present in 8-9% of people of Northern European ancestry 5.
Overall, ~5% of people positive for HLA-B27 develop ankylosing spondylitis.
anterior uveitis (25-40%)psoriasisinflammatory bowel disease: ulcerative colitis/Crohn diseaseosteopeniacardiovascular diseaseapical/upper lobe predominant interstitial lung disease with small cystic spaces (in ~1% of patients) 4aortic valve disease / aortitissecondary amyloidosis (rare)cauda equina syndrome (rare)The axial skeleton is predominantly affected, although in ~20% of cases the peripheral joints are also involved.sacroiliitis is usually the first manifestation 5 and is symmetrical and bilateralthe sacroiliac joints first widen before they narrowsubchondral erosions, sclerosis, and proliferation on the iliac side of the SI jointsat end-stage, the SI joint may be seen as a thin line or not visiblethe sacroiliac joints first widen before they narrowsubchondral erosions, sclerosis, and proliferation on the iliac side of the SI jointsat end-stage, the SI joint may be seen as a thin line or not visibleSee: grading of sacroiliitisearly spondylitis is characterized by small erosions at the corners of vertebral bodies with reactive sclerosis: Romanus lesions of the spine (shiny corner sign)vertebral body squaringnoninfectious spondylodiskitis: Andersson lesiondiffuse syndesmophytic ankylosis can give a "bamboo spine" appearancesyndesmophytes are classically described as paravertebral ossification running parallel to the spineinterspinous ligament ossification can give a "dagger spine" appearance on frontal radiographsossification of spinal ligaments, joints and discs (with fatty marrow within the ossified disc, best seen on MRI)apophyseal and costovertebral arthritis and ankylosisenthesophyte formation from enthesopathypseudoarthroses may form at fracture sitesdural ectasiasyndesmophytes are classically described as paravertebral ossification running parallel to the spineHip involvement is generally bilateral and symmetric, with uniform joint space narrowing, axial migration of the femoral head sometimes reaching a state of protrusio acetabuli, and a collar of osteophytes at the femoral head-neck junction.
There can be bridging or fusion of the pubic symphysis.
Knees demonstrate uniform joint space narrowing with bony proliferation.
Hands are generally involved asymmetrically, with smaller, shallower erosions and marginal periostitis.
Shoulder joint involvement is not uncommon and demonstrates a large erosion of the anterolateral aspect of the humeral head, producing a 'hatchet' deformity.
Marrow edema of acromion process, at the site of origin of deltoid muscle has been described as a very specific sign of the disease.
Radiographs of the lungs may demonstrate progressive fibrosis and bullous changes at the apices.
These lesions may resemble tuberculosis infection and bullae may become infected.
See: thoracic manifestations of ankylosing spondylitisPlain radiograph may be normal, or may reveal cardiomegaly.
See: cardiovascular manifestations of ankylosing spondylitismay be useful in selected patients with normal or equivocal findings on sacroiliac joint radiographschronic structural changes such as joint erosions, subchondral sclerosis, and bony ankylosis are better visualized on CT than on MRI or radiographs 15-17some normal variants of the SI joints may mimic features of sacroiliitissupplements scintigraphy in evaluating areas of increased uptakesuperior to radiographs and MRI in demonstrating injuriesimaging modality of choice in patients with advanced ankylosing spondylitis in whom there is suspicion of cervical spine fracturesagittal reformats should be obtained as axial images poorly assess the transverse fracture planeimaging modality of choice in patients with advanced ankylosing spondylitis in whom there is suspicion of cervical spine fracturesagittal reformats should be obtained as axial images poorly assess the transverse fracture planemay have a role in early diagnosis of sacroiliitis; MRI is more sensitive than CT or plain radiography in detecting inflammatory changes (which precede structural changes) such as bone marrow edema (best demonstrated on STIR sequences), synovitis and capsulitis (on gadolinium enhanced T1 weighted sequences) 16,18synovial enhancement on MR correlates with disease activity measured by inflammatory mediatorsenhancement of the interspinous ligaments is indicative of enthesitisincreased T2 signal correlates with edema or vascularized fibrous tissuesuperior to CT in the detection of cartilage inflammation and destructionuseful in following treatment results in patients with active ankylosing spondylitismaybe helpful in selected patients with normal or equivocal findings on sacroiliac joint radiographsqualitative assessment of accumulation of radionuclide in the SI joints may be difficult due to normal uptake in this location; thus, quantitative analysis may be more usefulratios of SI joint to sacral uptake of 1.3:1 or higher is abnormalFirst-line therapy is primarily focused on NSAIDs and non-pharmacological measures including education, exercise, physiotherapy and group-therapy.
Together, these treatments can lead to substantial clinical improvement in 70-80% of patients.
Local steroid injection and DMARDs (sulfasalazine and methotrexate) can also help with peripheral manifestations.
Second-line therapy includes TNF-alpha blockers (etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, certolizumab, golimumab) and IL17 inhibitors (secukinumab) 24.
Whether TNF-alpha blockers can inhibit radiographic disease progression has been the subject of some debate and continues to be investigated 23.fracturediffuse paraspinal ossification and inflammatory osteitis creates a fused, brittle spine, susceptible to fracture, even with minor traumamore common at the thoracolumbar and cervicothoracic junctionsrecognition of minimally displaced fractures is difficult due to osteopenia and deformity, and it is important to specifically search for disc space widening and discontinuity of the ossified paraspinal ligamentsalso known as "chalk stick" or "carrot stick fractures" 19Andersson lesion: inflammatory spondylodiskitis that occurs in association with ankylosing spondylitis and results in a disc pseudarthrosisrare neurological complications include transverse myelitis and/or cauda equina syndrome 20, 21diffuse paraspinal ossification and inflammatory osteitis creates a fused, brittle spine, susceptible to fracture, even with minor traumamore common at the thoracolumbar and cervicothoracic junctionsrecognition of minimally displaced fractures is difficult due to osteopenia and deformity, and it is important to specifically search for disc space widening and discontinuity of the ossified paraspinal ligamentsalso known as "chalk stick" or "carrot stick fractures" 19also known as "chalk stick" or "carrot stick fractures" 19It is a subjective assessment by the patient on a scale of 1- 10 (least to most severe) in the following five parameters 25general spine: enteropathic arthritiscervical spine: juvenile rheumatoid arthritisdiffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis

An anlage in biology refers to the primordial precursor of a tissue or organ, which is still recognisable as a collection of cells that will form that specific tissue.
The term is commonly used in medicine to refer to organs, such as the pancreas, when one is describing anatomical variants and the embryological processes that lead to them.
It also forms part of the name of some very rare neoplasms, e.g. pineal anlage tumor.

The Ann Arbor staging system was the landmark lymphoma staging classification system for both Hodgkin lymphoma and non-Hodgkin lymphoma.
It is named after the town of Ann Arbor in the US state of Michigan where the Committee on Hodgkin's Disease Staging Classification met in 1971 to agree on it.
It updated and replaced the earlier Rye staging system 2.
This classification has since been updated and modified, with the currently used criteria being the Lugano classification and the LYRIC classification.stage I: involvement of a single lymph node region or of a single extralymphatic organ or sitestage II: involvement of two or more lymph node regions on the same side of the diaphragm or localized involvement of an extralymphatic organ or site stage III: involvement of lymph node regions or structures on both sides of the diaphragmstage IV: diffuse or disseminated involvement of one or more extralymphatic organs, or either: isolated extralymphatic organ involvement without adjacent regional lymph node involvement, but with disease in distant sitesinvolvement of the liver, bone marrow, pleura or cerebrospinal fluidisolated extralymphatic organ involvement without adjacent regional lymph node involvement, but with disease in distant sitesinvolvement of the liver, bone marrow, pleura or cerebrospinal fluidAdditional substaging variables include:A: asymptomaticB: presence of B symptoms (including fever, night sweats and weight loss of ≥10% of body weight over 6 months)E: involvement of a single, extranodal site, contiguous or proximal to a known nodal site (stages I to III only; additional extranodal involvement is stage IV)S: splenic involvementX: bulky nodal disease: nodal mass >1/3 of intrathoracic diameter or 10 cm in dimension

Annular fissures are a degenerative deficiency of one or more layers that make up the annulus fibrosus of the intervertebral disc.
TerminologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresMany authors prefer the term annular fissure over annular tear, as the latter seems to imply acute injury 1,2.
In the setting of severe trauma with disruption of the disc, then the term disc rupture should be used.
The term annular gap (referring to a relatively wide annular fissure) is non-standard 2.
Most are asymptomatic, however, some are painful.
The defect allows an ingrowth of nerve endings and granulation tissue.
Fissures near the dorsal root ganglion are especially likely to be painful.
Annular fissures may be radial, transverse or concentric in orientation.
The fissure may involve all layers or only some.
The distinction is difficult if no disc extrusion is seen.
Discography (introduction of contrast into the nucleus pulposus) can help distinguish partial thickness or full thickness annular fissure, although the clinical relevance of this is disputed.
Although very common, only a minority are identified on MRI and are characterized by a region of high T2 signal (high intensity zone) in the otherwise low signal annulus.

Annular pancreas is a morphological anomaly which can cause duodenal obstruction.
This condition is important to recognize, as radiologists are frequently the first to make the diagnosis.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathology Radiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe incidence is probably 1 in 250, however its incidence is not accurately reported 1.
It is equally common in children and adults.
Detection usually occurs during the 3rd to 6th decade of life.
The presentation in adults and children can be different 2.About 25-33% of cases of annular pancreas in adults are asymptomatic and is an incidental finding on imaging.
However, it can cause pancreatitis, duodenal obstruction and rarely biliary obstruction in adults.
More common symptoms in adults include abdominal pain, post-prandial fullness, vomiting and gastrointestinal bleed from peptic ulcer disease.
In children, an annular pancreas may be associated with other congenital anomalies or cause duodenal obstruction.
The pancreas develops from a single dorsal and two ventral buds, which appear as outgrowths of primitive foregut at 5 weeks of gestation.
The ventral buds fuse rapidly.
In the 7th week of gestation, the duodenum expands, and rotates the ventral bud from right to left, and fuses with the dorsal bud.
The ventral bud forms the inferior part of uncinate process and inferior head of pancreas while the dorsal bud gives rise to tail and body of pancreas.
Annular pancreas develops due to failure of the ventral bud to rotate with duodenum, causing encasement of duodenum.
Annular pancreas can be either complete or incomplete 1:complete annular pancreas: pancreatic parenchyma or annular duct is seen to completely surround the 2nd part of duodenumincomplete annular pancreas: annulus does not surround the duodenum completely, giving a 'crocodile jaw' appearanceDown syndromepancreas divisumpancreatitispancreatic cancerintraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN)Pancreatic tissue is seen to completely or incompletely surround the 2nd part of the duodenum.
Associated duodenal narrowing and dilatation of proximal duodenum may also be seen.
In adults, it is frequently associated with pancreatitis.
Apart from annular pancreas features, pancreatic ductal anatomy can be well assessed with MR imaging.
Annular duct usually joins the main pancreatic duct or accessory duct (duct of Santorini).

The annular ligament can refer to:annular ligament of the stapesannular ligament of the proximal radio-ulnar joint

Annulo-aortic ectasia refers to a proximal dilatation of the aortic root at the level of the aortic annulus, it is also the same level as the sinus of Valsalva.
Annulo-aortic ectasia occurs with connective tissue diseases such as Marfan disease and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome.
It is a cystic medial necrosis, which puts the patients at great risk for aortic dissection, which in turn may lead to rupture 1-3.

Annulus fibrosus calcification is a form of intervertebral disc calcification where the peripheral annular portion (annulus fibrosus) can get calcified.
This may occur in isolation or in conjunction with other sites of disc calcification.
It could involve any portion of the spine.
Some suggest that it may due to subclinical or chronic stress on the involved intervertebral disc 1.If large in some situations it may mimic syndesmophytic bridgingligamentum flavum calcification / ligamentum flavum ossification

The annulus fibrosus (plural: annuli fibrosi) surrounds the nucleus pulposus and together they form the intervertebral disc.
The annulus comprises 15 to 20 collagenous (type I) laminae which run obliquely from the edge of one vertebra down to the edge of the vertebra below.
The direction of the fibers alternates from lamina to lamina.
The inner portion of the annulus is made of fibrocartilage which gradually blends with the nucleus pulposus.
Posterolaterally, the annulus is not only thinner but also has more disorganized collagen bundles, and a greater proportion of vertical fibers, contributing to it being the weakest part, and accounting for the high rate of disc herniation.
Furthermore, the composition of particularly the annulus fibrosis varies by spinal level.
Within the posterior cervical discs, the annulus fibrosus is thinner and consists of a single set of longitudinally-oriented fibers, rather than the multilaminated structure seen in lumbar discs 3.annulus fibrosus calcification

A mnemonic to remember the contents of the tendinous ring (also known as the annulus of Zinn) from superior to inferior is:"One Canal, Several Orbital Nerves In One Annulus"OC: optic canalSO: superior division of oculomotor nerveN: nasociliary nerveIO: inferior division of oculomotor nerveA: abducens nerve

The anode angle refers to the angle the target surface of the anode sits at in relation to the vertical.
Most x-ray tubes have an anode angle of 12-15 degrees but greater or lesser angles can also be used depending on the application.
The degree of angulation of the anode affects the effective focal spot length (not the width) and forms part of the line focus principle.
The effect that the angle has on the effective focal spot length can be calculated by the following equation:f = F x sinθ wheref = effective focal spot lengthF = actual focal spot lengthθ  = anode angleThe smaller the effective focal spot size the better spatial resolution produced but limits the size of the usable x-ray field.

Anode heel effect refers to the lower field intensity towards the anode in comparison to the cathode due to lower x-ray emissions from the target material at angles perpendicular to the electron beam.
The conversion of the electron beam into x-rays doesn’t simply occur at the surface of the target material but deep within it.
Because x-rays are produced deep in the target material they must traverse back out of it before they can proceed to the target field.
More target material needs to be traversed at emission angles that are perpendicular to the electron beam (closer to the anode) than at those more parallel to it (closer to the cathode).
This increase in material leads to more resorption of the x-rays by the target material resulting in fewer x-rays reaching the field at angles perpendicular to the electron beam.
It also means that the x-rays emitted to angles closer to the incident beam travel through less target material and fewer are resorbed.
The end result is that the field intensity towards the cathode is more than that towards the anode.
anode angle: by increasing the angle, the amount of target material perpendicular to the anode is decreased resulting in less resorption of x-rays produced.target-to-film distance: increase in distance reduces heel effect by allowing more divergence of the beam which produces a more uniform image.field size: the field will be more uniform at the center (i.e. smaller field size) due to the collimator absorbing the peripheral variations.positioning: by aligning higher attenuating material towards the cathode and lower attenuating material towards the anode the resulting field is more uniform

The anode is the component of the x-ray tube where x-rays are produced.
It is a piece of metal, shaped in the form of a bevelled disk with the diameter between 55 and 100 mm, and thickness of 7 mm, connected to the positive side of the electrical circuit.
The anode converts energy of incident electrons into x-rays dissipating heat as a byproduct.
Most x-ray tube anodes are made of tungsten (the target material).
Tungsten has a high atomic number (Z=74) and a high melting point of 3370 °C with a correspondingly low rate of evaporation.
The high atomic number of tungsten gives more efficient bremsstrahlung production compared to lower atomic number target materials.
An alloy containing tungsten and rhenium is also used because the addition of 5-10% rhenium prevents crazing of the anode surface.
The body of the anode is made of materials that are light and have a good heat storage capacity, like molybdenum and graphite.
Molybdenum is also often used as the target material for anodes used in mammography because it has an intermediate atomic number (Z=42) and the produced characteristic x-rays are of energies suited for this purpose.
Some anodes used in mammography are also made of rhodium (Z=45), which has characteristic x-rays of slightly higher energies, which are more penetrating and preferably used in dense breast imaging.
Anodes are designed as bevelled disks attached to a large copper rotor of the electric motor, rotating them at the speeds up to 10,000 RPM, with a temperature of 2000 °C.
The purpose of the rotation is to dissipate heat.
Most rotating anodes actually represent rather complex electromechanical systems consisting of approximately 350 pieces, taking around 150 assembly operations.
The anode disc rotates and is subjected to a focused beam of electrons emanated from the cathode, which are accelerated by a high potential difference between the cathode and the anode.
When the electron beam hits the anode (at the actual focal spot), interactions of the electrons with the target material produces the x-ray beam.
The anode angle is the angle between the vertical and the target surface with most x-ray tubes having an anode angle of 12-15°.
A smaller angle results in a smaller effective focal spot.
The whole anode is not included in x-ray production.
X-rays are produced on the rather small rectangular surface – the focal spot.

Anomalous course of a coronary artery is a type of congenital coronary artery anomaly.
It may represent a benign and incidental finding, but can also be a malignant course predisposing patients to life-threatening myocardial ischemia or arrhythmias, depending on where the artery runs.
Clinical presentationPathologyTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe majority (approximately 80%) of anomalous coronary artery courses are benign and asymptomatic.
However, on rare occasions, it can result in ischemia, arrhythmias or sudden death.
Most symptomatic patients present at a young age.
The coronary artery may pass between the aorta and the main pulmonary artery, representing a so-called interarterial course.
It may be associated with a "slit-like" orifice in which an acute angle course at the ostium is more prone to occlusion.
During physical activity, the artery may be compressed, and the flow within it may be compromised.
The presence of a "slit-like" orifice or intramural course of the coronary artery within the aortic wall is more predictive of adverse outcome than the interarterial course alone.
There are four common courses for an anomalous coronary artery arising from the opposite sinus 4,5:malignant courseinterarterial (i.e. between the aorta and the pulmonary artery): this is the most dangerous as it carries a high risk of sudden cardiac death benign courseretroaorticprepulmonicseptal (subpulmonic)interarterial (i.e. between the aorta and the pulmonary artery): this is the most dangerous as it carries a high risk of sudden cardiac death retroaorticprepulmonicseptal (subpulmonic)Treatment of anomalous coronary arteries is controversial.
Mainly patients with a benign course rarely need surgical treatment.
Symptomatic patients with an inter-arterial course may require surgical "re-implantation" of the anomalous coronary artery or "de-roofing" if an intramural course is present.

Anomalous left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery (ALCAPA), also known as Bland-White-Garland syndrome (BWG), is a rare congenital coronary artery anomaly and is considered one of the most severe of such anomalies.
There are two forms, based on onset of disease, each of which has different manifestations and outcomes 5:infantile typeinfants experience myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure90% die within the 1st year of lifeadult typemanifests in adultsresults in chronic myocardial ischemia and dysrhythmiasa cause of sudden cardiac deathinfants experience myocardial infarction and congestive heart failure90% die within the 1st year of lifemanifests in adultsresults in chronic myocardial ischemia and dysrhythmiasa cause of sudden cardiac deathEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThis abnormality only accounts for 0.25-0.5% of all congenital cardiac anomalies 3.It is most often an isolated anomaly, associated with other cardiac anomalies in only ~5% of cases 3,7:atrial septal defect (ASD)ventricular septal defect (VSD)patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)coarctation of the aortatetralogy of Fallot (TOF)In the infantile type, ALCAPA presents typically when infants are 1-2 months old (see Pathology below).
Presenting complaints are typically nonspecific, and include diaphoresis, irritability, wheezing and respiratory distress.
Precordial auscultation may reveal a murmur.
deep (> 5 mm), narrow Q wavestypically in the lateral leads I, aVL, V5-6most suggestive feature on the ECG, but may be absent in up to 45% of patients 10high left ventricular voltage (HLVV) 8meeting voltage criteria of left ventricular hypertrophycharacteristic of adolescents and older children may be accompanied by left axis deviationpoor R wave progression (PRWP) 9defined by an R wave height < 3 mm in lead V3typically in the lateral leads I, aVL, V5-6most suggestive feature on the ECG, but may be absent in up to 45% of patients 10meeting voltage criteria of left ventricular hypertrophycharacteristic of adolescents and older children may be accompanied by left axis deviationdefined by an R wave height < 3 mm in lead V3ALCAPA refers to a cardiovascular anomaly where the left main coronary artery arises from the pulmonary trunk instead of the left coronary sinus of the ascending aorta.
Either of two etiologies can be responsible for ALCAPA:the bulbus cordis undergoes abnormal septation into the aorta and pulmonary trunkpersistence of the pulmonary buds with concomitant involution of the aortic buds that are precursors of the coronary arteriesDuring the first month of life, physiologic pulmonary hypertension tends to preserve antegrade blood flow within the left coronary artery, and infants usually remain asymptomatic.
Shortly thereafter, pulmonary artery pressure, resistance, and oxygen content decrease.
Thus, the left ventricle receives blood with low oxygen content at low pressure, causing myocardial ischemia.
Further increases in myocardial oxygen consumption ensue in infarction of the anterolateral left ventricular free wall, often with resultant mitral valve insufficiency.
These events stimulate the development of a collateral circulation from the right pulmonary artery to the anomalous left coronary circulation.
Diminished pulmonary vascular resistance results in flow reversal in the left coronary artery into the pulmonary trunk (i.e. coronary steal phenomenon).
Congestive heart failure (CHF) is the end result of left ventricular dysfunction in combination with significant mitral insufficiency.
ECG-gated cardiac CT allows direct visualization of anomalous left main coronary arterial origin from the posterior aspect of the pulmonary artery.
The right coronary artery may be unusually dilated and tortuous with evidence of collateral formation.
Intercoronary collateral arteries along the external surface of the heart or within the interventricular septum may also be seen.
Prognosis depends significantly on the extent of collateral formation, however, most infants die within the 1st year of birth 4.
Death is usually due to circulatory insufficiency from left ventricular dysfunction or mitral valve incompetence, myocardial infarction, or life-threatening cardiac dysrhythmias 3.
Early surgical repair is potentially curative.
The Takeuchi procedure involves the creation of an aortopulmonary window and an intrapulmonary tunnel that baffles the aorta to the ostium of the anomalous left coronary artery.

An anomalous pancreaticobiliary junction, also known as pancreaticobiliary maljunction, describes the abnormal junction of the pancreatic duct and common bile duct that occurs outside the duodenal wall to form a long common channel (> 15 mm).EpidemiologyPathologyTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesThe anomalous junction is often associated with a choledochal cyst.
The vast majority of patients with Todani type Ia, Ic, and IVa choledochal cysts have an anomalous pancreaticobiliary junction 2.
However, the anomalous junction can be present without a choledochal cyst.
The Japanese Study Group on Pancreaticobiliary Maljunction proposed the following classification:type A (stenotic type): dilatation of the common bile duct upstream of a stenotic segment of distal common bile duct, which joins the common channeltype B (non‐stenotic type): nonstenotic distal common bile duct smoothly joins the common channel; no localized dilatation of the common channeltype C (dilated channel type): narrow distal common bile duct joins dilated common channeltype D (complex type): complex maljunction associated with annular pancreas, pancreas divisum, or other complicated duct systemsThe anomaly is associated with a higher risk of acute pancreatitis, cholangitis, and biliary tract carcinoma (cholangiocarcinoma, gallbladder carcinoma) 2,3.Treatment is surgical correction.

Anomalous systemic arterial supply to normal lung is an anatomical variant in which a portion of the lung (usually a basal segment) is supplied by a systemic vessel without a distinct pulmonary sequestration.
TerminologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee also ReferencesIt was traditionally (perhaps inappropriately since not a true sequestration) called a Pryce type 1 sequestration.
Many of these patients are asymptomatic but with time, many patients can develop localized pulmonary hypertension, hemoptysis (considered most common symptom), and high output cardiac failure.
It is thought to arise as a result of the failure of regression of the primitive aortic branches to the developing lung bud.
The systemic artery most commonly arises from the thoracic aorta, and less commonly from the abdominal aorta or celiac axis, and even more rarely from the left subclavian and internal mammary arteries.
It can be of two subtypes:isolated systemic arterial supply to normal lung (ISSNL)systemic arterial supply associated with normal pulmonary artery (dual supply)Basal segments of the left lower lobe are the most commonly affected site 1-8.Shows regions of systemic arterial supply to a normal lung but with accompanying no bronchial sequestration.
Treatment strategies include:surgery (often lobectomy and segmentectomy), when aberrant systemic artery is the sole supplyocclusion of aberrant vessel by surgical ligation or endovascular treatment (embolization), when the involved segment has a dual to multiple blood supplypulmonary pseudosequestration

Anomaly detection uses a large number of normal examples to train an algorithm which detects what is normal (based on the training examples) and what is not normal.
Anomaly detection has features of both supervised and unsupervised learning, and is applicable to Radiology as it’s important to differentiate the normal from the abnormalAnomaly detection is especially useful when there are many different “types” of anomalies as it’s hard for any algorithm to learn from examples what different types of anomalies should look like and future anomalies may not show similarities to anomalies in any training data.

Anophthalmia refers to a complete absence of ocular development.
It is often considered to represent the most severe form of microphthalmia.
It can occur in three different situations:primary anophthalmia: complete absence of eye tissue due to a failure of the part of the brain that forms the eyeoccurs from arrested development of the eyes in the early 4th week of gestation 6rare: 0.18-0.4 cases per 10,000 births 6secondary anophthalmia: there is initial eye development which halts for some reason leaving behind only residual eye tissue or extremely small eyes which can only be seen under close examinationoccurs from in utero events 6degenerative anophthalmia: there is initial ocular development but again for some reason starts to degenerate - possibly from lack of blood supply to the eyeoccurs from arrested development of the eyes in the early 4th week of gestation 6rare: 0.18-0.4 cases per 10,000 births 6occurs from in utero events 6Recognized associations are many and include:trisomy 13trisomy 18 6Lenz syndrome 5Goldenhar-Gorlin syndrome 5Waardenburg syndrome 1CHARGE syndrome 6 It derives from the Greek word: ανόφθαλμος meaning "without eye"

CNS manifestations of anorexia nervosa are common but varied with most of the imaging features non-specific in their own right.
For a general discussion, and for links to other system specific manifestations, please refer to the article on anorexia nervosa.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresNuclear medicineTreatment and prognosisPractical pointsReferencesStudies have identified that CNS complications may be present in up to 45% of patients with anorexia nervosa although these are based on patients being managed as inpatients 1.
The exact frequency of CNS complications in patients being managed in the community is unknown.
CNS complications may manifest with the following 1,2:headachesseizuresdiplopiamemory impairmentorthostatic hypotensionmovement disordersweaknessCT scans may show sulcal widening and ventriculomegaly in keeping with generalized cerebral atrophy.
The loss of grey and white matter has been shown to improve upon refeeding and restoration of body mass index (BMI) within the 'normal' 18-25 range.
MRI is able to demonstrate the same features as seen on CT.
Additionally, features associated with rapid refeeding, namely central pontine myelinolysis 6, and of vitamin B12 deficiency, namely subacute combined degeneration of the cord, may also be seen with MRI of the brain and spinal cord respectively.
The features of Wernicke encephalopathy due to thiamine deficiency are also seen in the brain.
These are often subtle or not detected on CT.
Patients with anorexia nervosa show increased activity in the medial frontal and anterior cingulate gyri in response to food compared to healthy individuals.
The medial prefrontal cortex is responsible for emotional values of stimuli (in this case, food) and influences a response accordingly.
However, despite recovered patients rating food stimuli just as positively as the healthy patients, their brain response to these stimuli is different, suggesting long term neuromodulation.
Dorsal anterior cingulate gyrus activity (which is responsible for attention and motivation) is shown to be proportional to body weight 3.Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scanning has revealed temporal lobe hypoperfusion in the acute phase of the illness.
This has been correlated with abnormal 5-HT activity in those regions 4,5.The treatment for anorexia nervosa involves various forms of psychotherapy including cognitive behavioral therapy and family-based treatment.
Acute management includes refeeding, correcting electrolyte abnormalities and monitoring for autonomic and cardiac complications.
No specific treatment exists for management of the neurological complications of anorexia, although some studies suggest that antipsychotics like olanzapine may help in quicker restoration of weight and better long term outcomes for patients 7.
Despite common practice, there is mixed evidence that antidepressants may be effective in altering the course of the disease 8,9.neurological imaging may be indicated in patients with anorexia to screen for CNS complicationsno specific treatment is available for the neurological complications of anorexia nervosacorrecting nutritional deficiencies and restoring normal body mass index appears to revert the CNS manifestations of anorexia nervosa

Anorexia nervosa is a psychiatric disorder characterized by distorted self-perception of body weight leading to starvation, obsession with remaining underweight, and an excessive fear of gaining weight.
One in five patients with anorexia dies due to complications of the disease.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresThe lifetime prevalence of anorexia nervosa is 0.66-1.9% based on geographical location, with a higher prevalence in developed countries.
Females are ten times more likely to be diagnosed with anorexia nervosa compared to men.
The lifetime incidence of anorexia nervosa has increased from 0.1 to 5.4 per 100,000 over the last fifty years.
In females aged 15-19 years, the incidence has increased from 56.4 to 109 per 100,000 person-years 1.The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of mental disorders (DSM-V) recognizes the following criteria for the diagnosis of anorexia nervosaa restriction of caloric intakelow body weight relative to age, sex and healthunjustified fear of weight gainbody dysmorphiaAlong with these, numerous signs may be observed and they include - but are not limited to - the following:lanugo hair and/or alopeciaamenorrhea (from suppression of the gonadal axis)dental caries (from purging)orthostatic hypotension or tachycardiaresting bradycardiahalitosislagophthalmospurpurae 2Complications include global cerebral atrophy, subacute combined degeneration of the cord due to vitamin B12 deficiency, Wernicke encephalopathy due to thiamine (vitamin B1) deficiency and alterations in the 5-HT system (observed on fMRI).
For more information on CNS complications, please refer to the article anorexia nervosa (CNS).Left ventricular mass reduction (can be observed on plain radiograph with reduced cardiothoracic ratio), mitral valve prolapse, decreased exercise tolerance and cardiac failure (including Takotsubo cardiomyopathy) are recognized complications 3.
Gastric dilatation (visible on plain radiographs), perforation, and necrosis are possible complications from repeated purging and/or gastric ulcers.
Others include esophageal perforation due to purging, and liver failure due to autophagy.
Patients may develop pancreatic pseudocysts and fibrotic pancreas.
Superior mesenteric artery syndrome has been reported due to loss of the fat pad between the superior mesenteric artery and the duodenum.
Patients may have constipation and abnormal colonic motility 4.Patients are more likely to be osteopenic due to low body mass, lack of vitamin D, calcium and estrogen.
Patients tend to have a shorter stature and multiple vertebral and extraspinal fractures with minimal stress.
In mild anorexia nervosa, bone marrow fat content has been reported to be paradoxically higher than normal, likely due to an increase in bone marrow adipocyte size and number 5.
However, in severe anorexia nervosa, fat content decreases due to gelatinous marrow transformation, giving a characteristic 'flip-flop' effect on MRI 6.There are reports of patients having diaphragmatic dysfunction, early onset emphysema (due to autophagy) and recurrent pulmonary infections (due to poor immune function) 7,8.Patients may develop enophthalmos due to loss of intraorbital fat 9.
In the mouth, radiographic evidence of dental caries may be evident 8.The treatment of anorexia is beyond the scope of this article.
However, it must be highlighted that various forms of psychotherapy including cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and family-based treatment (FBT) are the mainstay of treatment.
Medical management also includes refeeding and correction of micro and macronutrient deficiencies.
The prognosis depends on a number of factors.
A good therapeutic relationship, an absence of other co-morbid conditions like personality disorders, the presence of a strong support system, use of olanzapine and early intervention are associated with good outcomes.

Anorectal disease is a group of conditions that affect the anus and rectum.
The most common conditions in this group include hemorrhoids, anal fissures, anorectal abscess and anal fistula.
Reference articleSummaryRole of imagingRadiographic featuresRelated articlesCases and figuresThis is a summary article; we do not have a more in-depth reference article.hemorrhoidsenlarged blood vessels around the anus and lower rectumitch, inflammation and painmay bleedanal fissuressmall tears in the anal mucosacaused by constipation, diarrhea, anorectal inflammationpain, bleeding and itchinganorectal abscessabscess in close proximity to the anus or rectumcauses include inflammatory bowel disease, e.g. Crohn diseaseimaging is useful in diagnosis and treatment planningUS and CT can be helpfulanal fistula may form following an anorectal abscessmay be a complication of Crohn diseaseMRI is the best testenlarged blood vessels around the anus and lower rectumitch, inflammation and painmay bleedsmall tears in the anal mucosacaused by constipation, diarrhea, anorectal inflammationpain, bleeding and itchingabscess in close proximity to the anus or rectumcauses include inflammatory bowel disease, e.g. Crohn diseaseimaging is useful in diagnosis and treatment planningUS and CT can be helpfulmay form following an anorectal abscessmay be a complication of Crohn diseaseMRI is the best testonly for abscess and fistulaemake the diagnosisplan treatment, e.g. image-guided drainageassess response to treatmentOf limited use in perianal disease.
May be useful to exclude an intra-abdominal abscess or collection, diverticular disease or perirectal disease.
Imaging findings are dependent on the disease.
MRI is helpful for assessment of fissures, fistula and small, superficial abscesses, especially in Crohn disease.

ANOVA (ANalysis Of VAriance) is a statistical technique commonly seen in radiology research.
ANOVA analyzes are conceptually similar to the student t-test, but involve comparison of multiple groups at once.
The alternative to an ANOVA would be multiple head-to-head t-tests, but this would likely prove much more costly and time consuming, and the risk of encountering a type I error increases, the more studies are performed.
There are different types of ANOVA, useful in different situationsone-way ANOVA: testing to see if any group is different than the meanfactorial ANOVA: testing subgroups within groups to see if there are interactions between subgroupsrepeated measures ANOVA: data is gathered on the same sample twice (e.g. before and after)multivariate ANOVA (MANOVA): two dependent variables can be analyzedANOVAs are generally performed with the appropriate computer software.

Anoxic brain injury, also known as global hypoxic-ischemic injury, is seen in all age groups (from antenatal to the elderly) as a result of numerous etiologies.
The pattern of injury depends on a number of factors including:age of the patient (brain maturity)neonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathyhypoxic-ischemic injury in older children and adultsseverity of the hypoxic-ischemic insultduration of the hypoxic-ischemic insulttiming of imaging studies: early imaging findings can be subtle and are often overlookedneonatal hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathyhypoxic-ischemic injury in older children and adults

The ansa cervicalis (or ansa hypoglossi, an archaic synonym) is a component of the cervical plexus which gives muscular branches to the geniohyoid muscle of the suprahyoid group and most of the infrahyoid (strap) muscles (excluding the thyrohyoid muscle).
It lies within the carotid triangle, superficial to the carotid sheath.
Gross anatomyVariantsHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuressuperior root: derived from the anterior primary rami of C1inferior root: derived from the anterior primary rami of C2 and C3superior rootpasses with the hypoglossal nerve between rectus capitis anterior and rectus capitis lateralis musclesleaves the hypoglossal nerve lateral to the occipital arteryruns with the common carotid artery to join the inferior rootinferior rootpierces the prevertebral fascia at the level of C2/3passes around the internal jugular veinruns anteriorly to meet with the superior root anterior to the common carotid arterypasses with the hypoglossal nerve between rectus capitis anterior and rectus capitis lateralis musclesleaves the hypoglossal nerve lateral to the occipital arteryruns with the common carotid artery to join the inferior rootpierces the prevertebral fascia at the level of C2/3passes around the internal jugular veinruns anteriorly to meet with the superior root anterior to the common carotid arterybranch to geniohyoidbranches to infrahyoid (strap) musclesbranch to omohyoidbranch to sternohyoidbranch to sternothyroidbranch to omohyoidbranch to sternohyoidbranch to sternothyroidNote: the thyrohyoid muscle is innervated by the ventral ramus of C1 via the hypoglossal nerve rather than via the ansa cervicalis.accessory phrenic nerveAnsa cervicalis is Latin for handle of the neck.
It comes from the loop shape of the structure, which resembles a handle.

The ansa pancreatica is a rare type of anatomical variation of the pancreatic duct.
It is a communication between the main pancreatic duct (of Wirsung) and the accessory pancreatic duct (of Santorini).
Recently, the ansa pancreatica has been considered as a predisposing factor in patients with idiopathic acute pancreatitis 3.The ansa pancreatica arises as a branch duct from the main pancreatic duct.
It descends down initially, it then ascends upward forming a loop finally terminating at the minor papilla.
This type of pancreatic ductal variation can be identified on ERCP or MRCP studies.
It is derived from the Latin "ansa", which means "handle" as its configuration resembles a handle.

The anteater nose sign refers to an anterior tubular elongation of the superior calcaneus which approaches or overlaps the navicular on a lateral radiograph of the foot.
This fancifully resembles the nose of an anteater and is indicative of calcaneonavicular coalition 1,2.
The sign was first described by Oestreich et al in 1987 1.tarsal coalition

Antegrade ureteric stents are performed under fluoroscopic guidance, typically by an interventional radiologist or urologist.
It is performed via percutaneous access from the kidney.
It is usually performed using the access from a prior percutaneous nephrostomy, a so-called two-step procedure, although may be performed de novo.
The vast majority of ureteric stents placed are polyurethane in composition and require changing if left for longer than 3 months.
Metallic stents, composed of coiled spirals, have been available in recent years for those with malignant ureteric obstruction.
These may be left for 12 months or more since they are corrosion resistant.
Metallic stents demonstrate a reduction in the rate of tumor regrowth compared with conventional stents.1 Most practitioners leave a 'covering nephrostomy' in place for 24-48 hours after stent insertion.
This may be clamped to ensure good output from the stent (via the bladder), before the nephrostomy is removed and access is lost.
Somewhat surprisingly the word 'stent' is actually an eponym, originally named after Charles Stent (1807-1885), a largely-forgotten British dentist.
He invented an improved material for forming dental impressions, and set up a company to manufacture it.
During the Great War, J F Esser, a Dutch surgeon used a mold of Stent's Compound as a fixative for skin grafting in injured infantrymen.
This innovative use, was rapidly adopted into practice, and stenting as a concept rapidly segued into multiple specialties 2.retrograde ureteric stentpercutaneous nephrostomy

Antenatal screening of Down syndrome (and other less common aneuploidies) should be available as a routine component of antenatal care.
It allows families to either adjust to the idea of having a child with the condition or to consider termination of pregnancy.
For a general description of Down syndrome and its postnatal manifestations, please refer to the article on Down syndrome.
Maternal ageMaternal serum screeningUltrasoundReferencesThere is a strong association between the incidence of Down syndrome and maternal age.
Background risk based on maternal age is incorporated into both the serum screening based risk calculations and into the calculation of increased risk in the presence of a soft marker in 2nd trimester (see below).Please refer to the antenatal screening for a general discussion of the avenues of screening and diagnosis in the antenatal period.
Combined serum screening has an approximately 85% detection rate, with 5% false positive rate 8.
maternal beta hCGhigher than chromosomally normal fetusesthe difference increases with gestationPAPP-Alower than chromosomally normal fetuses difference decreases with gestation: therefore not commonly used as a second-trimester testhigher than chromosomally normal fetusesthe difference increases with gestationlower than chromosomally normal fetuses difference decreases with gestation: therefore not commonly used as a second-trimester testA triple screening/quadruple screening is done in high-risk cases.
However combined screening test is most preferred.
Detection rate for trisomy 21 is at approximately 80% with a false positive rate of ~5% 8.maternal free beta-hCG: higher than chromosomally normal fetusesinhibin A: higher than chromosomally normal fetusesAFP: lower than chromosomally normal fetuses unconjugated estriol (uE3): lower than chromosomally normal fetuses Nuchal translucency: thickness depends on the size of the fetus (CRL), but in general it is considered abnormal if >3 mm.
There is evidence that the inclusion of nasal bone measurement improves the specificity of 1st trimester data 5.Ductus venosus flow is another parameter that has been reported to further increase the sensitivity of 1st trimester screening 12.Approximately 30% of babies with Down syndrome have detectable abnormalities on the mid-trimester ultrasound 1.
Soft markers are sonographic findings that do not in themselves cause any adverse outcomes.
However, they are seen more frequently in fetuses with an abnormality.
This article addresses the soft markers that are specific to Down syndrome.
For a general discussion, please refer to the article on soft markers.
The markers are as follows 13:echogenic intracardiac focuspositive LR: 5.83negative LR: 0.8isolated LR: 0.95ventriculomegalypositive LR: 27.5negative LR: 0.94isolated LR: 3.8nuchal fold thickness >6 mmpositive LR: 23.3negative LR: 0.8isolated LR: 3.79echogenic bowelpositive LR: 11.44negative LR: 0.9isolated LR: 1.65hypoplastic/absent nasal bonepositive LR: 23.3negative LR: 0.46isolated LR: 6.58shortened humeruspositive LR: 4.8negative LR: 0.7isolated LR: 0.78mild pyelectasispositive LR: 7.6negative LR: 0.9isolated LR: 1.08shortened femurpositive LR: 3.72negative LR: 0.8isolated LR: 0.61aberrant right subclavian artery (ARSA)positive LR: 21.48negative LR: 0.7isolated LR: 3.9positive LR: 5.83negative LR: 0.8isolated LR: 0.95positive LR: 27.5negative LR: 0.94isolated LR: 3.8positive LR: 23.3negative LR: 0.8isolated LR: 3.79positive LR: 11.44negative LR: 0.9isolated LR: 1.65positive LR: 23.3negative LR: 0.46isolated LR: 6.58positive LR: 4.8negative LR: 0.7isolated LR: 0.78positive LR: 7.6negative LR: 0.9isolated LR: 1.08positive LR: 3.72negative LR: 0.8isolated LR: 0.61positive LR: 21.48negative LR: 0.7isolated LR: 3.9In the presence of soft markers, the risk of Down syndrome is recalculated as new risk = baseline risk x likelihood ratio (LR).
The new LR is calculated by multiplying all positive LRs (of markers present) and all negative LRs (of markers absent).Note: if a single marker is present, then isolated LR is considered.
The following may be present in association with Down syndrome:cardiac defectstricuspid regurgitationatrial septal defect (ASD)ventricular septal defect (VSD)atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)tetralogy of Fallot (less common 1)abdominalduodenal atresiaesophageal atresiaomphalocele (more common with trisomy 18 9)central nervous systemmild fetal ventriculomegaly craniofacial/calvarialshort maxillamild brachycephalyotherabnormal ductus venosus waveforms 6cystic hygromahydrops fetalistricuspid regurgitationatrial septal defect (ASD)ventricular septal defect (VSD)atrioventricular septal defect (AVSD)tetralogy of Fallot (less common 1)duodenal atresiaesophageal atresiaomphalocele (more common with trisomy 18 9)mild fetal ventriculomegaly short maxillamild brachycephalyabnormal ductus venosus waveforms 6cystic hygromahydrops fetalisOther features that may be present, but are neither a structural abnormality or a validated soft marker 8hypoplastic 5th digitwide iliac angleshortened frontothalamic distanceshort fetal ear lengthbrachydactylySome fetuses can develop transient abnormal myelopoiesis (TAM) particularly towards the 3rd trimester and can then develop fetal hepatomegaly 11.

Antenatal screening and diagnosis are currently available for a few selected genetic conditions, including trisomy 21 (Down syndrome), trisomy 18 (Edward syndrome), trisomy 13 (Patau syndrome) and neural tube defects.
For an overview of the conditions and their manifestations, please refer to the specific articles:trisomy 21 (general article)antenatal featurestrisomy 18trisomy 13neural tube defectsantenatal featuresScreeningNon-invasive prenatal testing (NIPT)DiagnosisRelated articlesReferencesThe avenues of testing include:Maternal blood test may be performed during either1st trimester: as part of the combined serum screeningperformed in conjunction with the nuchal translucency ultrasound (see below)performed at 9w-13w6d (ideally 9-12w)the earlier it is performed, the better the detection ratemeasures free βhCG and PAPP-Aperformed in conjunction with the nuchal translucency ultrasound (see below)performed at 9w-13w6d (ideally 9-12w)the earlier it is performed, the better the detection ratemeasures free βhCG and PAPP-Athe earlier it is performed, the better the detection rateor2nd trimester: maternal serum screening (or “quadruple test”)performed at 14-20w (ideally 15-17w)measures alpha fetoprotein (AFP), free βhCG (or total hCG), unconjugated estriol (uE3) +/- inhibin Aperformed at 14-20w (ideally 15-17w)measures alpha fetoprotein (AFP), free βhCG (or total hCG), unconjugated estriol (uE3) +/- inhibin AFirst-trimester ultrasound screening involves the measurement of crown rump length (CRL), nuchal translucency (NT) and fetal heart rate.
Results are combined with the serum screening to generate a risk.
For screening validity, the test must be performed at 11w3d to 13w6d, or when CRL measures 45-84 mm (if there is a discrepancy, CRL takes precedence).Nuchal translucency:<3 mm is considered normal; however, this must be matched with maternal age and gestational ageplease refer to the article on nuchal translucency for a discussion of correct measurementfor combined serum screening, a risk of 1 in 300 or less is considered as increased riskAdditional factors that further increase the detection rate and reduce false positive rates include nasal bone, ductus venosus flow and tricuspid flow.
See also: 11-13 weeks antenatal scanA second-trimester fetal morphology ultrasound scan is generally performed at 18-20 weeks.
It is not recommended as the primary screening tool for trisomy 21 or trisomy 18, although it can be used as primary screening for neural tube defects 3.
Nonetheless, there are a number of structural anomalies that can be diagnosed in the second trimester.
Furthermore, numerous sonographic soft markers may be identified on antenatal ultrasound: features that do not constitute an abnormality in themselves but are associated with an increased risk of congenital anomaly.
These are discussed in detail in a separate article.
NIPT is a recently developed alternative to combined maternal serum screening.
It refers to genetic testing done on a maternal blood sample, whereby cell-free fetal DNA is detected in maternal plasma.
It is a highly sensitive and specific screening tool (>99% sensitivity and specificity for trisomy 21).Its availability is currently limited by cost.
Furthermore, NIPT screens only for specific chromosomal abnormalities: trisomy 21, 18, and 13, with or without monosomy X (Turner syndrome).
Therefore, it should be performed alongside 1st trimester ultrasound for detection of other anomalies.
Initial guidelines recommended NIPT for high-risk women only; however, it is now also available to the general population.
Diagnostic (as opposed to screening) tests are offered to high-risk patients:maternal age 37 years or olderincreased risk on maternal screeningincreased risk on fetal morphology scan Invasive tests usually offered arechorionic villus sampling: performed at 11-12 weeksamniocentesis: performed at 15-18 weeksHistorically, the risk of miscarriage was said to be 1% for CVS and 0.5% for amniocentesis, although this is somewhat operator dependent.
NOTE: This article is currently in accordance with the Australian/New Zealand and UK antenatal screening guidelines.
We recognize that some regional variation in the availability and timing of antenatal screening exists.

Antenatal soft ultrasound markers are fetal sonographic findings that are generally not abnormalities as such but are indicative of an increased age adjusted risk of an underlying fetal aneuploidic or some non chromosomal abnormalities.
Most of the described features do not constitute a structural defect and may be detected on antenatal screening, typically during a second trimester (anatomy) scan.
Many are transient.
What's included or not appears to depend on the respective authorities in each region, and remains dynamic, with certain markers periodically emerging, or conversely losing favor.
The following are markers in common use at the time of writing.
The list includes features having an association with:increased nuchal thickness: >6 mmfetal ventriculomegaly: >10 mmhypoplastic nasal boneechogenic intracardiac focus (EIF) choroid plexus cystsechogenic bowel shortened fetal long bones: less than 3rd centile for gestational ageshortened femurshortened humerusaberrant right subclavian arteryshortened femurshortened humerusfetal pyelectasis/fetal renal pelvic dilatation: antero-posterior diameter of the renal pelvis >4-5 mmsingle umbilical artery (SUA)enlarged cisterna magnaclenched fists Rocker bottom feet sandal gap strawberry shaped skull Correct interpretation of these often requires correlation with other risk factors such as history, maternal age and maternal serological results.

The anterior abdominal wall forms the anterior limit of the abdominal viscera and is defined superiorly by the xiphoid process of the sternum and costal cartilages and inferiorly by the iliac crest and pubic bones of the pelvis.
Gross anatomyBlood supplyLymphatic drainageInnervationVariantsRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesThe anterior abdominal wall has seven layers (from superficial to deep):Scarpa's fascia is deep to the skin and subcutaneous fat in the lower part of the wall and is fused with Colle's fascia in the perineum.
The muscle layers include the external oblique muscle, internal oblique muscle, transversus abdominis muscle anterolaterally and the rectus abdominis muscle anteriorly.
The fascia surrounding the 3 anterolateral muscles fuse anteriorly to attach to the rectus abdominis at the linea semilunaris.
The fascia then continues medially surrounding the rectus abdominis as the rectus sheath further fusing in the midline with the contralateral fascia at the linea alba.
The muscles and associated soft tissues derive blood supply from branches of the superior epigastric, subcostal and inferior epigastric arteries and their cutaneous branches above the umbilicus.
Arterial supply below the umbilicus is from superficial epigastric arteries, superficial circumflex iliac arteries and superficial external pudendal arteries.
Superficial veins are paired with the arteries.
Veins above the umbilicus drain into the azygos system and below the umbilicus into the femoral system via the great saphenous vein.
The lymphatic vessels above the umbilicus drain into axillary and sternal nodes.
The vessels below the umbilicus drain into superficial inguinal nodes.
Derived from the ventral rami of T7 through L1.
Thoracoabdominal nerves from the ventral rami of T7 to T11.
Subcostal nerves from the ventral rami of T12.
Ventral rami of the L1 nerve roots give rise to iliohypogastric and ilioinguinal nerves.
Variable level of the arcuate lineVariable number of horizontal septations in rectus abdominisPresence (or absence) of pyramidalis and/or rectus sternalis musclesPresence (or absence) of superficial inferior epigastric artery supplying superficial tissues of abdominal wall below the level of the umbilicusMuscle layers of the anterior abdominal wall may be outlined between the extraperitoneal fat and subcutaneous fat layers, especially in obese patients.
Three muscle layers (external oblique, internal oblique, transverse abdominis) can be seen anterolaterally in cross section and also the rectus muscle and its sheath can be seen anterior to the other three muscle layers.abdominal hernias

Antepartum hemorrhage (APH) refers to vaginal bleeding during the second half of pregnancy (> 20 weeks gestation).
APH may occur in varying degrees from mild to severe, with concomitant risk to mother and baby and potential to result in severe maternal/fetal compromise, including death.
EpidemiologyPathologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIt complicates 3-5% of all pregnancies 3.
APH is associated with an increased risk of Postpartum hemorrhage.
Causes include:placental abruptionplacenta previa (20% of all APH)gestational trophoblastic diseasevasa previa (rarest cause of hemorrhage in pregnancy 3)uterine rupturecervical or genital tract bleedingdifferential diagnosis for bleeding in pregnancyperigestational hemorrhage

Anterior angulation of the coccyx may be a normal variant but poses a diagnostic challenge for those considering coccygeal trauma.
Four types of coccyx have been described:type I: the coccyx is curved slightly forward, with its apex pointing caudally (~70%)type II: the coccyx is curved more markedly anteriorly, with its apex pointing straight forward (~15%)type III: the coccyx is sharply angulated forward between the first and second or the second and third segments (~5%)type IV: the coccyx is subluxed anteriorly at the level of the sacrococcygeal joint or at the level of the first or second intercoccygeal joints (~10%)Patients with a type II-IV coccyx are more prone to develop idiopathic coccygodynia than those with a type I configuration.
Partial or total coccygectomy usually provides relief in these cases.
The intercoccygeal angle is a useful radiological assessment to evaluate the anterior angulation of the coccyx and its deformity.

Anterior ankle impingement (AAI) syndrome is the result of chronic repetitive trauma with impingement of the anterior tibia against the talus.
Clinical presentationRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresClinical features of anterior ankle impingement syndrome include painful and limited dorsiflexion and anterior joint line swelling 1.
Anterior impingement can occur after severe previous ankle sprain or repeated weight bearing activities with ensuing thickening of the injured ligaments, resulting in their impingement between the anterior inferior tibia and the talus.
Chronic repetitive trauma from impingement of anterior tibia and talus leads to osteophytic spur formation at the anterior tibial margin and the corresponding talus, tibiotalar spur.
This is best appreciated on lateral ankle radiograph or sagittal view on CT.
Some advocate to the use of oblique radiographs to assess if bony spurring is medial or lateral 5.T2 fat sat or STIR sagittal images can be useful for demonstrating marrow edema, subchondral changes and synovial/soft tissue thickening.ankle joint osteoarthritis: loss of joint space as well as osteophytesankle impingement syndromes

A mnemonic that refers to the order of the anterior ankle tendons around the ankle is:Tom Hates DickThe mnemonic can be used to remember the order of the tendons from medial to lateral as they pass under the extensor retinaculum of the ankle.
T: tibialis anteriorH: extensor hallucis longusD: extensor digitorum longus The phrase Tom, Dick and Harry was in common usage in the early 19th century 1.

The anterior atlanto-occipital membrane is a thin membrane that joins the upper border of the anterior arch of the atlas (C1) to the anterior inferior surface of the foramen magnum.
It is a continuation of the anterior longitudinal ligament above the C1 level.
It is immediately posterior to the prevertebral muscles.
It limits extension of the atlanto-occipital joint.

The anterior bronchus sign refers to the appearance of the anterior segmental bronchus of the upper lobes as seen on a frontal chest radiograph.
The anterior segment bronchus of the upper lobes courses anteriorly and laterally.
When the orientation is predominantly anteriorly the bronchus is seen end-on as a ring shadow.
This occurs ~50% of the time.
The upper limit of the adjacent soft tissue thickness:normal: <3 mm of soft tissue lateral to the bronchusabnormal: >6 mm of soft tissue implies the presences of a mass, and warrants cross-sectional imaging

The anterior cardiac veins are a group of parallel coronary veins that course over the anterior surface of the right ventricle, draining it and entering directly into the right atrium.
They may occasionally drain into the small cardiac vein.

The anterior cardinal veins are paired transient embryologic venous vessels which deliver venous return to the heart starting at about 4 weeks of gestation 1.The anterior cardinal veins begin their embryological development as symmetric venous channels draining blood from the cranial structures of the embryo.
They anastomose with the posterior cardinal veins inferiorly to form the common cardinal veins (ducts of Cuvier), which drain into the sinus venosus 2.
At approximately 8 weeks of gestation, the left brachiocephalic vein forms from an anastomosis between the thymicothyroic veins and connects the left and right anterior cardinal veins 3.
After this left-right connection forms, asymmetry develops when the caudal portion of the left anterior cardinal vein begins to involute, which redirects blood flow to the proximal right anterior cardinal vein which persists to become the right-sided superior vena cava (SVC) 1.
The caudal portion of the left anterior cardinal artery forms the oblique ligament and vein of Marshall after involution 4.
The more cranial portions of the bilateral anterior cardinal veins persist and form the internal jugular veins 1.
During the course of their development and involution, the anterior cardinal veins form multiple normal permanent structures, as well as potentially some anomalous structures.
Failure of the left anterior cardinal vein to involute is the most common developmental variation in the central venous system with an incidence of 0.3% in the general population, which increases to 4.4% in patients with other cardiac defects 5.
Failure of the left anterior cardinal vein to involute results in a left sided superior vena cava, and in 8% of these cases, drainage of the left sided superior vena cava into the left atrium 5.
Failure of involution is usually related to a failure of the anastomosis of the left and right anterior cardinal veins through the brachiocephalic vein 3.

The anterior center-edge angle, also known as the vertical-center-anterior (VCA) angle, is a radiographic measurement of the anterior coverage of the femoral head by the acetabulum.
It is used in assessing acetabular dysplasia and pincer type of femoroacetabular impingement.
It is measured in the false profile view of the hip joint.
The angle is measured between a vertical line through the center of the femoral head (line VC) and a second line from the center of the hip to the anterior-most aspect of the acetabulum (line CA).Values from 20-45 degrees are considered to be within the normal range 2.
If abnormal:increased: pincer-type impingementdecreased: acetabular dysplasiaIt was first described by Lequesne and de Seze in 1961 1.

The anterior cerebral artery along with the middle cerebral artery forms at the termination of the internal carotid artery.
It is the smaller of the two, and arches anteromedially to pass anterior to the genu of the corpus callosum, dividing as it does so into its two major branches; pericallosal and callosomarginal arteries (see below).
It supplies the medial aspect of the cerebral hemispheres back to the parietal lobe.
The ACA is divided into five segments 8,9,10:A1 (horizontal, precommunicating): originating from the terminal bifurcation of the internal carotid artery, extending ~14 mm in length, terminating at the anterior communicating artery (ACOM)A2 (vertical, postcommunicating, infracallosal): originating at the ACOM, extending anterior to the lamina terminalis and along the rostrum of the corpus callosum, terminating either at the genu of the corpus callosum or at the origin of the callosomarginal arteryA3 (precallosal): extends around the genu of the corpus callosum or distal to the origin of the callosomarginal artery, terminating where the artery turns directly posterior above the corpus callosumA4 (supracallosal): above the body of the corpus callosum anterior to the plane of the coronal sutureA5 (postcallosal): above the body of the corpus callosum posterior to the plane of the coronal sutureThe pericallosal artery refers either to the distal part of the ACA starting from A2 (after the origin of the ACOM) or from A3 (defined after the origin of the callosomarginal artery).
In the former case, the A2, A3, and A4-5 segments refer to proximal, middle, and distal segments of the pericallosal artery, respectively 11,12.The A4 and A5 segments predominantly run along the callosal sulcus, but in a minority of cases run above that, medial to the cingulate gyrus.
There are two main branching patterns of the ACA.
In the first the A2 gives off the callosomarginal artery (which lies in the cingulate sulcus), and continues as the pericallosal artery.
In this configuration, the terminal (cortical) branches are given off the callosomarginal artery.
In the second configuration, the callosomarginal is absent and the terminal branches arise directly from the pericallosal.
A1medial lenticulostriate arteriesanterior communicating artery A2recurrent artery of Heubnerorbitofrontal arteryfrontopolar arteryA3pericallosal arterycallosomarginal artery (runs in the cingulate sulcus)medial lenticulostriate arteriesanterior communicating artery recurrent artery of Heubnerorbitofrontal arteryfrontopolar arterypericallosal arterycallosomarginal artery (runs in the cingulate sulcus)Orbital branches, 2 or 3 in number, branch over the orbital surface of the frontal lobe supplying:olfactory cortexgyrus rectusmedial orbital gyrusThey are named:orbitofrontal arteryfrontopolar arteryFrontal branches supply:corpus callosum (with the exception of the splenium)pericallosal arterycingulate gyrusmedial frontal gyrusparacentral lobule (as the branches reach over the vertex to supply a strip of cortex on the surface, they are responsible for supply to the lower limbs)pericallosal arteryParietal branches supply:precuneusMultiple small branches are given off proximally (A1, ACOM, proximal A2) supply:anterior perforated substancelamina terminalisrostrum of the corpus callosumseptum pellucidumanterior part of the putamenhead of the caudate nucleusanteromedial part of the anterior limb of the internal capsuleThe latter two (head of caudate and adjacent part of the internal capsule) are supplied by the recurrent artery of Heubner and associated smaller perforating branches.
It has its origin near the A1-ACOM-A2 junction and can arise from all three, although usually it is from the A2.
It curves back on itself and is at risk from ACOM aneurysm clipping.
ACA fenestration with a reported incidence of 0-4% of A1 segment fenestrationazygos ACA: ACA territories supplied by a single A2 trunk; incidence of ~2% (range 0.2-4.0%)ACA trifurcation: three A2 segments; incidence of ~7.5% (range 2-13%) bihemispheric ACA: a hypoplastic A2 segment with contralateral A2 segment dominance supplying both ACA territories; incidence of ~4.5% (range 2-7%)A1 segment absence/hypoplasia, contralateral A1 segment dominance and supply to ipsilateral A2 segment by a large anterior communicating artery; 10% of individuals demonstrate hypoplasia of A1 segment using a diameter 1.5 mm or smallerDuplication of A1two or three anterior communicating arteriesasymmetry of A1 segment which is associated with ACA aneurysmpersistent primitive olfactory artery 6

Anterior cerebral artery (ACA) territory infarcts are much less common than either middle or posterior cerebral artery territory infarcts.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresACA territory infarcts are rare, comprising ~2% of ischemic strokes 1,2.ACA stroke syndrome presents as 1-3:dysarthria, aphasiaunilateral contralateral motor weakness (leg/shoulder > arm/hand/face)minimal sensory changes (two-point discrimination) in the same distribution as aboveleft limb apraxiaurinary incontinenceACA territory infarcts are less common because if the A1 segment is occluded there is generally enough collateral flow via the contralateral A1 segment to supply the distal ACA territory 2.Embolic strokes (often with MCA involvement) are the most common cause 3.
Rarely, they are also seen as a complication of severe midline shift, where the ACA is occluded by mass effect or severe vasospasm.
The features are those of cerebral infarction in the anterior cerebral artery vascular territory:paramedian frontoparietal cerebral cortexanterior corpus callosumanterior limb of the internal capsuleinferior portion of the caudate headwatershed infarctcerebral venous infarct

Anterior cervical discectomy and fusion (ACDF) is a commonly performed spinal fusion procedure for the decompression of the cervical cord due to disc protrusions and posteriorly projecting osteophytes.
It is not to be confused with an ACDA (anterior cervical disc arthroplasty).TechniqueFollow-upComplicationsReferencesCases and figuresThe procedure is carried out via an anterolateral neck incision with surgical approach passing between the aerodigestive tract (trachea, esophagus, pharyngeal muscles) medially and the carotid neurovascular bundle (carotid artery, internal jugular vein, vagus nerve) laterally 2.The intervertebral disc is then resected along with the fibrocartilage covering the adjacent vertebral endplates (to allow for eventual osseous fusion).
It is possible to reach back to the posterior longitudinal ligament, removing osteophytes and disc protrusion as well and extending laterally to decompress the neural exit foramina 1,2.
Once decompression has taken place an interbody spacer (or "cage") of some kind is introduced.
This can be in the form of 1,3: boneautogenous bone graft (e.g. from the anterior iliac crest of the patient harvested at the same time as the fusion is performed)allogenic bone graft (e.g. from cadaveric iliac bone or fibula)animal allogenic bone graft (e.g. bovine or calf)synthetic usually packed with cancellous autobone, demineralized bone matrix or ceramicsplasticmetal (e.g. titanium or stainless steel)ceramic autogenous bone graft (e.g. from the anterior iliac crest of the patient harvested at the same time as the fusion is performed)allogenic bone graft (e.g. from cadaveric iliac bone or fibula)animal allogenic bone graft (e.g. bovine or calf)plasticmetal (e.g. titanium or stainless steel)ceramic Following this, a plate with screws that pass into the vertebral bodies above and below the operative segment is usually introduced to provide additional stabilization 1.Newer devices combine screw fixation and interbody spaced into the one device, fitting entirely within the interbody space without the added bulk of the anterior plate 1.
A common way to follow up ACDF is the lateral cervical radiograph to assess for prevertebral soft tissue swelling.
A 2017 prospective study with 106 patients post-ACDF 4 measured the difference of the soft tissue thickness anterior to the midportion of C3 and C6 at immediate post-op, 2 weeks, 1 month, 6 months and 12 months after surgery against baseline:C3: significant difference up to 1 month; from third month the difference was not significant (i.e. back to the baseline)post-op: 5.10-6.56 mm2 weeks: 2.61-4.07 mm1 month: 1.12-2.68 mmC6: significant up to 6 monthspost-op: 4.01-5.47 mm2 weeks: 2.72-4.18 mm1 month: 1.78-3.24 mm3 months: 0.98-2.44 mm6 months: 0.40-1.86 mmpost-op: 5.10-6.56 mm2 weeks: 2.61-4.07 mm1 month: 1.12-2.68 mmpost-op: 4.01-5.47 mm2 weeks: 2.72-4.18 mm1 month: 1.78-3.24 mm3 months: 0.98-2.44 mm6 months: 0.40-1.86 mmAlthough the procedure is generally safe a number of complications can be encountered including 3: intraoperative complicationsesophageal perforationdamage to the carotid artery or internal jugular veinimmediate postoperative complicationsdysphagia due to plate and screwshoarse voice due to damage to the recurrent laryngeal nervedelayed complicationsadjacent segment degenerationadjacent level ossificationesophageal perforationdamage to the carotid artery or internal jugular veindysphagia due to plate and screwshoarse voice due to damage to the recurrent laryngeal nerveadjacent segment degenerationadjacent level ossification

The anterior cervical space is a small infrahyoid compartment of the head and neck.
It is a fat containing space and is not enclosed by fascia 1.areolar fatposterior: carotid spacemedial: visceral spacesuperior: submandibular spacelipoma (most common) 2second branchial cleft cysts 2

Anterior choroidal artery (AchA) syndrome is a rare entity characterized by the triad of hemiplegia, hemianaesthesia and contralateral hemianopia as a result of cerebral infarction in the anterior choroidal artery territory.
The syndrome may also be associated with neuropsychological disorders, including left neglect syndrome in right-sided lesions and disorders of speech in left-sided lesions.
Incomplete forms of the syndrome are more common than that of complete forms.
The incomplete forms include lacunar syndromes and ataxic hemiparesis 5.The complete AchA strokes are usually associated with cardioembolic sources and carotid stenosis.
Smaller AchA strokes usually cause lacunar strokes and are typically due to T2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension and hyperlipidemia 5.
The triad of symptoms is rare to see because of the anastomosis with the MCA, PCA and posterior communicating artery.
The AchA has an extensive area of supply due to large variations in its distributed territory  6.
This means that its territory cannot be seen on isolated coronal or axial images 6.
As a result of its extensive and strategic supply, AchA infarcts can often be confused with PCA or MCA infarcts 6.

The anterior choroidal artery (AChA) supplies several crucial anatomical structures of the brain important for vision and motor control.
Identification of AChA is important because of its strategic and extensive area of supply as well as large variations in the territorial distribution.
Gross anatomyVascular territoryVariant anatomyRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe AChA originates from the posterior wall of the internal carotid artery (ICA) between the origin of the posterior communicating artery (PCOM) (which is 2-5 mm proximal to the AChA) and the internal carotid termination (which is 2-5 mm distal to the AChA).
It measures ~1 mm in diameter.
The AChA is located lateral to the optic tract, it then curves medially to its inferomedial surface, to curve again laterally to run along the lateral aspect of the optic tract and circumvents the cerebral peduncles to reach the lateral geniculate body.
It traverses in the posterolateral direction above the uncus to enter the choroidal fissure, at the so-called plexal point.
The plexal point is an angiographic landmark for where the artery becomes intraventricular, appearing at the center of a checkmark-like course on lateral projection where the vessel descends and then sharply ascends posteriorly.
The AChA can be divided into two segments:cisternal segment: extends from its origin until the choroidal fissure; measures ~2.5 cm (range 1.5-3.5 cm) in lengthintraventricular segment: after entering the choroidal fissurecisternal segment 5deep brain structuresposterior limb and retrolenticular part of the internal capsule including optic radiationslateral thalamus including lateral geniculate nucleusoptic tractlateral cerebral peduncleglobus pallidus internustail of caudate nucleusmesial temporal structures (uncus)head of hippocampusamygdalaintraventricular segmentchoroid plexus of the anterior part of the temporal horns of the lateral ventriclesdeep brain structuresposterior limb and retrolenticular part of the internal capsule including optic radiationslateral thalamus including lateral geniculate nucleusoptic tractlateral cerebral peduncleglobus pallidus internustail of caudate nucleusmesial temporal structures (uncus)head of hippocampusamygdalaposterior limb and retrolenticular part of the internal capsule including optic radiationslateral thalamus including lateral geniculate nucleusoptic tractlateral cerebral peduncleglobus pallidus internustail of caudate nucleushead of hippocampusamygdalachoroid plexus of the anterior part of the temporal horns of the lateral ventriclesAnteriorly, there is some overlap/interindividual variation with the territories of the lenticulostriate arteries.occasionally it may originate fromintracerebral carotid bifurcationmiddle cerebral arteryposterior communicating arteryduplication of AChA is reported in ~5% of caseshyperplastic AChA in which AChA supplies the area usually associated with PCAintracerebral carotid bifurcationmiddle cerebral arteryposterior communicating arteryanterior choroidal artery syndrome

The anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), previously known as the precingulate, is a region of the brain surrounding the anterior corpus callosum.
It is involved in the limbic system and the prefrontal cortex.
SummaryGross anatomyBlood supplyRelated pathologyReferenceslocation: it is located superior to the anterior corpus callosum, more specifically Brodmann's areas 24, 25, 32, 33blood supply: it receives its vascular supply from the pericallosal arteryrelations: anterior part of the cingulate gyrus, involved in the limbic system and prefrontal cortexThe anterior cingulate cortex forms the anterior part of the cingulate gyrus.
It involves Brodmann's areas 24, 25, 32 and 33.
The dorsal aspect of the anterior cingulate cortex has been separated and is now referred to as the middle cingulate cortex.
It is predominantly located in the frontal lobe.
The anterior cingulate cortex is known to have extensive connections with the amygdala, the lateral hypothalamus and brainstem nuclei, hippocampal centers, orbitofrontal cortex and the ventral striatum.
The functions of the anterior cingulate cortex are only starting to be studied extensively due to its involvement in various mental health illnesses.
The anterior cingulate cortex is involved in emotional regulation, emotion-based learning, discerning the impact of pain on emotion (via the amygdala), autonomic regulation (via the brainstem nuclei), memory (via the hippocampus) and the reward pathway (via the orbitofrontal cortex).The activation of anterior cingulate cortex leads to a suppression of the limbic-system response leading to better emotional regulation.
Reduced activation of the anterior cingulate cortex leads to poor emotional regulation, as observed in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder, where there is an increased stress response to a previous traumatic memory or trigger.
This is in contrast to social anxiety, there the region shows increased activation.
Patients with depression and schizophrenia also demonstrate the low activity of the anterior cingulate cortex, leading to a blunted affect 1.The anterior cingulate cortex, being part of the cingulate gyrus is supplied by the pericallosal arteries, which are branches of the anterior cerebral artery 2.schizophreniamajor depressive disorder

The anterior circulation is the blood supply to the anterior portion of the brain, including most of the supratentorial structures excluding the occipital lobes.
The anterior circulation is supplied by the internal carotid arteries which each divide into two the large terminal branches, the anterior cerebral and middle cerebral arteries.
Due to the anastomotic circle of Willis, the anterior circulation connects via the posterior communicating arteries to the posterior circulation.anterior circulation infarct

The anterior commissure - posterior commissure line (AC-PC line), also known as the bicommissural line, has been adopted as a convenient standard by the neuroimaging community, and in most instances is the reference plane for axial imaging in everyday scanning.
The creation of a standard image plane makes it easier to perform comparisons between exams.
It is described on midline sagittal images and is similar to the orbitomeatal line traditionally used on CT, although the AC-PC line is typically ~9 degrees steeper than the orbitomeatal line 2.
It is strictly defined by Talairach as a line passing through the superior edge of the anterior commissure (AC) and the inferior edge of the posterior commissure (PC) 1,2.
An alternative and less commonly used description of the line proposed by Schaltenbrand draws the line through the midpoint of both the anterior and posterior commissures, resulting in a slightly shallower angle 1,3.
Prior to widespread volumetric CT brain acquisition which has allowed axial images to be reformatted along the AC-PC line, a number of techniques were developed to approximate the CT gantry tilt such that axial images generated were similar to the AC-PC line.
Such methods include: MRI protocols

The anterior commissure of the larynx is the anterior junction point of the true vocal cords.
It is bounded anteriorly by the thyroid cartilage and is part of the laryngeal glottis.

The anterior commissure (AC) is a transversely oriented commissural white matter tract that connects the two cerebral hemispheres along the midline.
It is a very important anatomical landmark that connects different parts of the limbic system on both sides and plays a role in the interhemispheric transfer of visual, auditory, and olfactory information between temporal lobes 1, however the role of the AC is not yet well understood.
The AC corresponds to a white matter tract almost completely surrounded by gray matter that crosses the midline just ventral to the supraoptic recess of the third ventricle and the columns of the fornix.
It ends in the amygdaloid nucleus of the temporal pole bilaterally 2.

The anterior communicating artery (ACOM) arises from the anterior cerebral artery and acts as an anastomosis between the left and right anterior cerebral circulation.
Approximately 4 mm in length, it demarcates the junction between the A1 and A2 segments of the anterior cerebral artery.
The ACOM gives off numerous small branches that go on to supply the following structures:cingulate gyrusanterior columns of the fornixoptic chiasmlamina terminalishypothalamuspara-olfactory areasACOM duplication: incidence 18%ACOM fenestration: incidence ~15% (range 12-21%)ACA trifurcation arising from the ACOM: incidence ~7.5% (range 2-13%)absent ACOM: incidence 5% (surgical dissection) 2If the vessel is not well seen on routine angiography, cross-compression view of the ACA/ACOM complex can be performed.

The anterior compartment of the arm is one of the two compartments of the arm.
A sheath of deep fascia surrounds the arm, the brachial fascia.
Two intermuscular septa (medial and lateral) extend from it to attach to the humerus at the medial condylar ridge and lateral supracondylar ridge, respectively.
These septa divide the arm into its anterior and posterior compartments.
MusclesArterial supplyInnervationRelated articlesReferencesThree flexors:biceps brachii musclebrachialis musclecoracobrachialis musclebrachial arteryPrimarily by the musculocutaneous nerve (C5,6), although the radial nerve (C7) does supply a small lateral part of brachialis.

The forearm is divided into the anterior compartment and the posterior compartment by the deep fascia, lateral intermuscular septum and the interosseous membrane between the ulna and radius.
MusclesBlood supplyInnervationRelated articlesReferencesThe eight muscles located in the anterior compartment of the forearm can be divided into three layers - superficial, intermediate and deep 1.flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU)palmaris longus (PL)flexor carpi radialis (FCR)pronator teres (PT)flexor digitorum superficialis (FDS)flexor digitorum profundus (FDP)flexor pollicis longus (FPL)pronator quadratus (PQ)arterial supply: ulnar artery, radial arteryThe median nerve supplies the anterior compartment musculature except the ulnar (medial) part of the FDP and FCU muscles, which are supplied by the ulnar nerve.

The anterior compartment of the leg is one of the four compartments in the leg between the knee and foot.
Muscles within this compartment primarily produce ankle dorsiflexion and toe extension.
The leg is separated into anterior, lateral, superficial posterior and deep posterior compartments by intermuscular septa and surrounded by the deep fascia of the leg.
BoundariesMusclesBlood supplyInnervationRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresanterior: deep fascia of the legposterior: interosseous membranemedial: lateral surface of the tibialateral: anterior intermuscular septum and medial surface of the fibulatibialis anterior muscleextensor hallucis longus muscleextensor digitorum longus muscleperoneus tertius musclebranches of the anterior tibial arterydeep peroneal nerve

The anterior compartment of the thigh is one of the three compartments in the thigh.
Muscles within this compartment primarily produce hip flexion and knee extension.
The thigh is separated into anterior, posterior and medial (adductor) compartments by intermuscular septa and surrounded by the fascia lata.
MusclesBlood supplyInnervationRelated articlesReferencessartoriuspectineusquadricepsrectus femorisvastus lateralisvastus intermediusvastus medialisarticularis genurectus femorisvastus lateralisvastus intermediusvastus medialisbranches of the common femoral artery, profunda femoris artery and superficial femoral artery.femoral nerve

The anterior corticospinal tract is formed at the level of the of the medullary pyramids, where the majority (90%) of descending corticospinal tract fibers decussate to form the lateral corticospinal tract.
The majority of the remaining non-decussating 10% of fibers form the much smaller anterior corticospinal tract 1,2.
It descends in the anterior funiculus of the spinal cord, lying close to the anterior median fissure.
At each relevant level, fibers cross the anterior spinal commissure of the spinal cord to synapse with ventral horn motor neurons.
The anterior corticospinal tract thus becomes smaller as it descends, ending at the level of the mid-thoracic cord.
Variant anatomyFunctionRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIn some cases, the anterior corticospinal tract is absent.
In rare cases, this tract may contain all corticospinal fibers.
The anterior corticospinal tract is primarily responsible for gross and postural movement of the trunk and proximal musculature 3.
Spinal cord injuryBrown-Séquard syndromeTransverse myelitis

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) avulsion fracture or tibial eminence avulsion fracture is a type of avulsion fracture of the knee.
This typically involves separation of the tibial attachment of the ACL to variable degrees.
Separation at the femoral attachment is rare 5.EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIt is more common in children than adults.
It has been hypothesized that this may be due to the relative weakness of incompletely ossified bone relative to ligamentous fibers 7, or relatively increased elasticity of ligament in children 8.They are usually caused by forceful hyperextension of the knee or by a direct blow over distal end of femur with the knee flexed.
A classification initially proposed by Meyers and McKeevers in 1959, later modified by Zaricznyj in 1977 6, is the most common system for describing ACL avulsion fracture.
Under the Meyers and McKeever system, injuries are classified into four main types:type 1: minimally/nondisplaced fragmenttype 2: anterior elevation of the fragmenttype 3: complete separation of the fragmenttype 3a: involves small portion of eminencetype 3b: involves the majority of the eminencetype 4: comminuted avulsion or a rotation of the fracture fragmenttype 3a: involves small portion of eminencetype 3b: involves the majority of the eminenceDepending on the type, a tibial avulsion is typically seen as a fracture fragment in variable orientation involving the tibial eminence.
There may be anterior translation of the femur on the tibia on the lateral view.

The anterior cranial fossa constitutes the floor of the cranial vault which houses the frontal lobes of the brain.
Structures present in the midline of the anterior cranial fossa from anterior to posterior are: groove for superior sagittal sinusgroove for anterior meningeal vesselsforamen cecumcrista galliprovides attachment to falx cerebrican contain marrow hence can be T1 hyperintense on MRslit and groove for nasociliary nerveanterior ethmoid foramenorifice for olfactory nerve posterior ethmoid foramenolfactory fossaprovides attachment to falx cerebrican contain marrow hence can be T1 hyperintense on MRanterior: cribriform plate of ethmoid bone, orbital plate of frontal bone, lesser wings and body of sphenoid boneposterior: lesser wings of sphenoid bone

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) ganglion cysts, commonly referred to simply as ACL cysts, along with ganglion cysts arising from the alar folds that cover the infrapatellar fat pad, make up the vast majority of intra-articular ganglion cysts of the knee.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAnterior cruciate ligament ganglion cysts are uncommon, with the prevalence reported to be between 0.3-1.3% of knee MRIs, and are usually incidental findings.
Knee pain, being the most common presenting complaint, is usually attributable to other pathology.
Anterior cruciate ligament ganglion cysts are histologically identical to the ganglion cysts seen elsewhere, most commonly around the wrist.
They comprise mucoid material surrounded by a pseudocapsule 6.The pathogenesis remains controversial, with two theories being favored:sequelae of ACL mucoid degenerationherniation of synovial tissue through a defect in the joint capsule or tendon sheathMRI is the gold standard for diagnosis and has higher sensitivity compared to standard anterior portal approach arthroscopy since an intraligamentous lesion may not be apparent externally (ligament may appear normal arthroscopically) 6.
A posterior approach will allow the arthroscopist to detect changes by probing the ligament and will allow potential aspiration of the cysts.
In one of the largest imaging studies of ACL ganglion cysts, Bergin et al used two out of three criteria for diagnosis 2:T2 signal within the ACL, hyperintense to joint fluidlobulated (or multiloculated) lesion marginmass effect on ligament fibersOften there is some irregularity to the bone subjacent to the tibial insertion.
ConsiderACL mucoid degenerationwider differential diagnosis of cysts around the knee joint include:popliteal cystmeniscal cystganglion cystTibial tunnel and pretibial cysts after ACL reconstructionknee joint effusionpopliteal cystmeniscal cystganglion cystTibial tunnel and pretibial cysts after ACL reconstructionknee joint effusion

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) mucoid degeneration, along with tears and anterior cruciate ligament ganglion cysts, is a relatively common cause of increased signal within the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL).
The appearance can mimic acute or chronic interstitial partial tears of the ACL.
However, in the case of mucoid degeneration secondary signs of an ACL injury are usually absent.
Secondary signs include bone bruising, meniscal tears, anterior subluxation of the tibia and other ligamentous injuries.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresACL mucoid degeneration is present on ~10% (range 9-12%) of 3 T MRI examinations and 2% of 1.5 T MRI examinations 6.
Typically patients present with knee pain or restricted movement, although often other potential causes for the patient's symptoms are found.
The pathogenesis remains controversial.
Possible etiologies include:age-related (senescent) degenerationcongenital or acquired synovial tissue entrapment between ACL fibersIt is postulated that mucoid degeneration may be a predisposing factor in the formation of ACL ganglion cysts.
On MRI, the ligament is thickened and ill-defined with a "celery stalk" appearance.
Its signal is increased on all sequences.
Intact fibers are best seen on T2WI.MRI is better at detecting mucoid degeneration than arthroscopy, as the surface of the ligament is often intact.
No treatment is usually required.
If arthroscopy is performed, the ligament may appear entirely normal, especially using the standard anterior portal approach.
A posterior approach will allow for the detection of changes by probing the ligament and mucoid material can be expressed.

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction complications are common, occurring in 10-25% of patients.
Clinical presentationPathologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresPatients with complications of ACL reconstruction can present with decreased range of motion (impingement or arthrofibrosis) and/or laxity (graft rupture or stretching) 2.Complications include 1-3:decreased range of motiongraft impingementarthrofibrosiscyclops lesionintra-articular bodytunnel cystpost-operative laxity: occurs in 1-8% of patients 3graft stretchinggraft rupturemiscellaneousfixation material complication, e.g. migration, displacement, fragmentationinflammatory reaction / rejectionseptic arthritis: ~0.5% (range 0.1-0.9%)retractile capsulitisiliotibial band syndromedonor tendon complications, e.g. rupture, shorteningvascular complications: inferior geniculate artery pseudoaneurysms have been reported at donor tendon sitesgraft impingementarthrofibrosiscyclops lesionintra-articular bodytunnel cystcyclops lesiongraft stretchinggraft rupturefixation material complication, e.g. migration, displacement, fragmentationinflammatory reaction / rejectionseptic arthritis: ~0.5% (range 0.1-0.9%)retractile capsulitisiliotibial band syndromedonor tendon complications, e.g. rupture, shorteningvascular complications: inferior geniculate artery pseudoaneurysms have been reported at donor tendon sitesradiographic evaluation of anterior cruciate ligament reconstruction

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction is a common procedure post ACL tear.
It aims to reduce knee joint instability and thus prevent any further meniscal and/or cartilage damage.
ProcedureComplicationsOutcomesReferencesThere are numerous surgical techniques for ACL reconstruction 1-3:autograft reconstructionbone–patellar tendon–bone autografthamstring autograftfour-strand autograft from semitendinosus and/or gracilis tendonsquadriceps tendon autograftallograft reconstructionsynthetic graft reconstructionbone–patellar tendon–bone autografthamstring autograftfour-strand autograft from semitendinosus and/or gracilis tendonsquadriceps tendon autograftfour-strand autograft from semitendinosus and/or gracilis tendonsThe bone–patellar tendon–bone autograft and four-strand hamstring autograft are the two most commonly employed techniques 1,2.See article anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) reconstruction complications for further details.
Clinical failure is reported in ~10% (range 6-12%) of patients 4.
~17.5% (range 13.6-21.5%) of patients develop symptomatic osteoarthritis post ACL reconstruction 1.

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears are the most common knee ligament injury encountered in radiology and orthopedic practice.
Clinical presentation PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresPatients typically present with symptoms of knee instability, usually after acute trauma.
The following signs and symptoms are common:popping sensation at the time of injury, followed by swellinginitial inability to weight wear, which improves in a short periodknee felt to "gives way" especially during pivoting movementapprehension with an attempt at non-linear movementsThe combination of the Lachman, pivot shift and anterior drawer tests are used to clinically confirm diagnosis 9.
The anterior cruciate ligament is the most commonly disrupted ligament of the knee, especially in athletes who participate in sports that involve rapid starting, stopping, and pivoting (e.g. soccer, basketball, tennis, netball, and snow skiing).O'Donoghue's unhappy triadSegond fractureposteromedial corner injury of the kneeMeniscocapsular separationIn younger patients, avulsion of the tibial attachment may be seen in younger patients.deep lateral sulcus sign - depression of lateral femoral condyle representing impaction fractureanterior tibial translocation signSegond fracture arcuate fracturejoint effusionConsidered to have high specificity and sensitivity in detecting anterior cruciate ligament disruption 6.
CT is helpful in characterizing the avulsion bone fragment when it is present.
Imaging of anterior cruciate ligament tears should be divided into primary and secondary signs.
Primary signs are those that pertain to the ligament itself.
Secondary signs are those which are closely related to anterior cruciate ligament injuries.swellingincreased signal on T2 or fat-saturated PDfiber discontinuityabnormal anterior cruciate ligament orientation relative to intercondylar (Blumensaat's) lineACL fibers subjectively less steep than a line tangent to the intercondylar roof (Blumensaat's line)ACL angle (angle between the intercondylar line and ACL) >15° with the apex of the angle located anteriorly, indicating a less steep ACL line - this indicates a ruptured and collapsed ligamentempty notch sign: a fluid signal at the site of femoral attachment at the intercondylar notch, denotes avulsion at the femoral attachment.
ACL fibers subjectively less steep than a line tangent to the intercondylar roof (Blumensaat's line)ACL angle (angle between the intercondylar line and ACL) >15° with the apex of the angle located anteriorly, indicating a less steep ACL line - this indicates a ruptured and collapsed ligamentACL tears typically occur in the middle portion of the ligament (midsubstance tears) and appear as discontinuity of the ligament or abnormal contour.
The signal of the ACL can be more hyperintense on T2.
If the angle is still normal and there is a hyperintense signal, a partial rupture is more likely than a complete rupture.
ACL tear may only involve one bundle.
Imaging signs of isolated posterolateral bundle tear are as follows: gap sign: fluid signal and/or a gap between the medial aspect of the lateral femoral condyle and the lateral aspect of the mid-ACL, can be seen on either axial or coronal MRI images.footprint sign: incomplete coverage of the lateral aspect of the tibial spine of the tibia by the distal ACL attachment, seen only on coronal MRI images 8Secondary signs include 7:bone contusion in lateral femoral condyle and posterolateral tibial plateau >7 mm of anterior tibial translation, also known as the anterior tibial translocation sign or anterior drawer sign uncovered posterior horn of the lateral meniscusSegond fracture, and to a lesser degree arcuate signreduced PCL angle due to buckling of PCL positive PCL line sign medial or lateral collateral ligament injuryAnterior cruciate ligament reconstruction aims to reduce joint instability and avoid (further) meniscal and/or cartilage damage.
However, ~17.5% (range 13.6-21.5%) of patients develop symptomatic osteoarthritis post ACL reconstruction 11.
evaluation of ACL reconstructionevaluation of ACL reconstruction

Anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) is one of the two cruciate ligaments that stabilize the knee joint.
Gross anatomyBlood supplyFunctionRadiographic appearanceRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe ACL arises from the anteromedial aspect of the intercondylar area on the tibial plateau and passes upwards and backwards to attach to the posteromedial aspect of the lateral femoral condyle.
Like the posterior cruciate ligament, the ACL is intracapsular but extrasynovial.
The ACL consists of two components 4:attaches to roof of intercondylar notchmore vertically oriented, and slightly shorterattaches to wall of intercondylar notcharterial: middle genicular arteryThe ACL functions to prevent posterior translation of the femur on the tibia (or anterior displacement of the tibia) during flexion-extension of the knee.
The AMB is responsible for the posterior translation of the femur at 30 degrees flexion, and the PLB resists hyperextension and prevents posterior translation of the femur in extension 1, 2.
Unlike other ligaments or tendons, the ACL normally as a heterogeneous appearance and the AMB and PLB are defined by surrounding high-intensity structures 1.
The ACL Blumensaat line angle is normally ≤15º. It is calculated by drawing a line parallel to the roof of the intercondylar notch of the femur (Blumensaat's line) and one parallel to the distal portion of the ACL.
The angle is calculated at the intersection of these two lines.
An angle of >15º indicates an abnormal course and probable ACL tear 3.ACL tearACL cystACL mucoid degeneration

Anterior hip dislocation is much less common than a posterior hip dislocation.
It constitutes only 5-18% of all hip dislocations.
While the posterior dislocation is often associated with fractures, the anterior dislocation is mostly an isolated injury 1.It can be classified into superior (pubic or iliac) and inferior (obturator) subtypes.
The inferior subtype is much more common 3.Radiographic signs of anterior hip dislocation are the lesser trochanter being more visible due to external rotation.
The hip is abducted, and the femur head is usually inferior to the acetabulum.
Shenton's line is also broken.
Whereas inferior anterior hip dislocation is easily recognized on an anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis, the radiographic appearance of superior anterior hip dislocation is less straightforward, often leading to an initial misdiagnosis of posterior hip dislocation.
Two radiologic findings may help to distinguish these two from each other:lesser trochanter more visible in anterior dislocation due to external rotationfemoral head will appear larger than the contralateral hip on account of geometric magnification

The anterior division of the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve has four branches, which are all motor branches except one.
The four branches are:deep temporal nerveslateral pterygoid nervesmasseteric nervebuccal nerve

The anterior epitympanic recess, also known as the supratubal recess, is a small discrete space in the epitympanum anterior to the malleus.
It is separated from the epitympanum proper by the cog.

The anterior ethmoid artery is a branch of the ophthalmic artery.
It supplies the anterior and middle ethmoidal sinuses, frontal sinus, the lateral nasal wall and the nasal septum (see nasal cavity).Gross anatomyRadiographic featuresPractical pointsRelated articlesReferencesIt traverses the anterior ethmoidal foramen with the anterior ethmoidal nerve (which is the continuation of the nasociliary nerve) before entering the anterior cranial fossa where it gives off meningeal and nasal branches.
The nasal branches continue into the nasal cavity to supply the nasal septum where it contributes to the Kiesselbach’s plexus in addition to supplying the lateral nasal wall.
The anterior ethmoidal artery is identified via identification of the anterior ethmoidal notch.
This notch is reportedly seen in 95-100% of subjects.
Location of the anterior ethmoidal artery should be reported by the radiologist on pre-operative studies.
If the anterior ethmoidal notch is abutting the lateral lamella or the fovea ethmoidalis, the artery is considered protected during functional endoscopic sinus surgery as it is as the level of the skull base.
If a supraorbital cell is seen above the anterior ethmoidal notch, or if the artery is located below the skull base, it is considered at risk.

The anterior ethmoid foramen is a small opening in the ethmoid bone.
It is the anatomical border of anterior and posterior ethmoid air cells.
It transmits the anterior ethmoidal artery, vein and nerve.
The anterior ethmoid foramen is situated 25 mm away from the lacrimal crest, 12 mm anterior to the posterior ethmoidal foramen.

The anterior ethmoidal nerve is an extraconal branch of the nasociliary nerve, a branch of the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
Some authors describe it as either the terminal branch or a direct continuation of the nasociliary nerve.
It branches off distal to the infratrochlear nerve and courses through the medial aspect of the extraconal space of the orbit.
It exits the orbit through the anterior ethmoidal foramen and runs in the roof of the anterior and middle ethmoidal sinuses supplying the mucosa of these sinuses before ascending into the anterior cranial fossa briefly through the cribriform plate, supplying the dura of the anterior cranial fossa as it does so.
It then enters the superior nasal cavity by descending through the cribriform plate by passing through the nasal slit immediately lateral to the crista galli to supply the mucosa of the anterosuperior half of the nasal septum and lateral nasal wall.
It grooves the internal surface of the nasal bone and terminates by piercing nasal cartilage to become the external nasal nerve, supplying the skin of the dorsal nose and the nasal apex.

The anterior ethmoidal notch contains the anterior ethmoidal artery and has significant rates of anatomic variation that put the artery during function endoscopic sinus surgery (FESS).Gross anatomyRadiographic featuresRelated pathologyReferencesCases and figuresThe anterior ethmoidal notch lies in the medial wall of the superomedial orbit, adjacent to the anterior ethmoid air cells.
the notch can be identified bilaterally in 95-100% of patients on coronal reformats, and when not seen bilaterally is present unilaterally 1During FESS the anterior ethmoidal artery is considered "protected" if the notch is adjacent to the fovea ethmoidalis or lateral lamella.
The anterior ethmoidal artery is at increased risk of injury during FESS if there are pneumatized supraorbital anterior ethmoid air cells (occurs in ~30% of patients) 1.

Anterior fontanelle inclusion cysts, also commonly referred to as congenital dermoid inclusion cysts, are cystic lesions overlying the anterior fontanelle without communication with the underlying intracranial compartment.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresAlthough the term congenital dermoid inclusion cyst is more common some of these lesions do not contain any secondary skin appendages and in fact represent epidermoid cysts 1.
Furthermore, as even dermoids usually appear cystic without the fatty components frequently encountered elsewhere, it is difficult to distinguish between the two on imaging.
As such anterior fontanelle inclusion cyst or anterior fontanelle dermoid/epidermoid is probably a better term.
Congenital anterior fontanelle inclusion cysts are most frequently seen in black individuals or those with black ancestry and are more commonly seen in women (F:M 2:1) 1,2.
These cysts usually present at birth as rounded swellings over the anterior fontanelle without any pain or tenderness 1,2.
Over time they gradually grow.
Occasionally these cysts can become infected 3.
Anterior fontanelle inclusion cysts represent sequestration of epidermal rests during the third to fifth week of gestation 1.
These cysts are lined by stratified squamous epithelium and their content primarily fluid 1.
In the majority of cases, some secondary skin appendages (hair, sebaceous glands) are present and thus they represent dermoids.
In others, only epidermal cells a found and thus these represent epidermoid cysts.
The importance of imaging is to distinguish these cysts from other malformation that communicate with the intracranial compartment (see differential diagnosis section below).
CT is, therefore, a minimum requirement, and if any concern for such communication exists, then further assessment with MRI is warranted.
These cysts appear as well-demarcated ovoid lesions ranging in size from a few millimeters to many centimeters in diameter.
They are deep to the scalp and superficial to the dura.
The fontanelle is often widened with remodelling/resorption of the underlying bone 3.
The content is hypodense similar to CSF but can be heterogeneous depending on content 3.
Most anterior fontanelle inclusion cysts are fluid-filled and therefore have low T1 and high T2 signal.
Surgical excision is necessary for cosmetic reasons and to confirm the diagnosis.
Complete resection is curative.
On imaging consider meningocelemeningoencephalocelesebaceous cystlipomahemangiomacephalhematomasubgaleal hematomalymphangiomasinus pericraniiabscess

The anterior or frontal fontanelle (or fontanel) is the diamond-shaped soft membranous gap at the junction of the coronal and sagittal sutures.
It persists until approximately 18-24 months after birth, after which it is known as the bregma.
The precise timing of the anterior fontanelle closure is quite variable, and the research literature shows cases of closure from 6 months that may represent a normal variation in healthy babies 2 although early or late closure of a fontanelle is associated with various pathologies 3.
The fontanelle normally measures between 0.6-3.6 cm (mean 2.1 cm) 3.
The size of the anterior fontanelle tends to vary predictably with age, peaking around 2 months2 .
It is the largest of the fontanelles and is the main sonographic window for performing cranial ultrasound.
posterior fontanelleposterior fontanelle

Anterior glenolabral injuries are common in the setting of anterior shoulder dislocation and comprise a number of closely related entities:Bankart lesionbony Bankart lesionanterior labroligamentous periosteal sleeve avulsion (ALPSA)Perthes lesionglenolabral articular disruption (GLAD)humeral avulsion of the glenohumeral ligament (HAGL)bony humeral avulsion of the glenohumeral ligament (BHAGL)These are discussed individually in their respective articles.
Below are the key distinguishing features.
Perthes lesionanterior labrum avulsed, but minimally or undisplacedintact periosteal sleeve lifted off scapular neckinferior glenohumeral ligament complex remains attached to periosteumALPSAsimilar to Perthes but the inferior glenohumeral ligament complex displaced medially and 'bunched up'labrum displaced inferomediallyBankart lesiontorn labrum and periosteumbony Bankart lesionsame as Bankart lesion with associated osteochondral injury of the glenoid rim GLADonly partial tear of the anterior labrumglenoid articular cartilage defectHAGLmore inferioravulsion of the inferior glenohumeral ligament from its humeral insertionBHAGLsame as HAGL but with bony avulsion of the medial humerusanterior labrum avulsed, but minimally or undisplacedintact periosteal sleeve lifted off scapular neckinferior glenohumeral ligament complex remains attached to periosteumsimilar to Perthes but the inferior glenohumeral ligament complex displaced medially and 'bunched up'labrum displaced inferomediallytorn labrum and periosteumsame as Bankart lesion with associated osteochondral injury of the glenoid rim only partial tear of the anterior labrumglenoid articular cartilage defectmore inferioravulsion of the inferior glenohumeral ligament from its humeral insertionsame as HAGL but with bony avulsion of the medial humerus

Causes of anterior hip pain include:osteoarthritissynovitis includingpigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS)synovial osteochondromatosisinflammatory arthropathy (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis)iliopsoas bursitis ganglion cystsynovial cystmuscle tearmalignancyinguinal adenopathyfemoral vessel pathologypigmented villonodular synovitis (PVNS)synovial osteochondromatosisinflammatory arthropathy (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis)iliopsoas bursitis

Anterior horn syndrome is a fairly generic term used to refer to flaccid paralysis and areflexia due to involvement of the anterior grey matter horns of the spinal cord.
Sensation is typically preserved.
Causes of anterior horn syndrome include: anterior spinal artery ischemia poliomyelitis-like syndromeHopkins syndrome - rare

The anterior humeral circumflex artery is a vessel arising from the axillary artery at the proximal part of the arm.
It is smaller in size relative to the posterior humeral circumflex artery.
origin: branch of the axillary artery at the proximal part of the armlocation: proximal armsupply: head of humerus, glenohumeral joint, teres major and minor, and deltoid 1main branches: ascending branchterminal branches: anastomoses with the posterior humeral circumflex artery 1The anterior circumflex humeral artery arises laterally from the axillary artery at the proximal part of the arm and travels deep to the short head of the biceps brachii muscle and the coracobrachialis muscle 1.
The anterior circumflex humeral artery gives rise to an ascending branch.
The main branch anastomoses with the posterior humeral circumflex artery 1.The anterior circumflex humeral artery provides part of the blood supply to the glenohumeral joint, teres major and minor, and deltoid muscles.
The ascending branch provides supply to the head of the humerus 1.

The anterior humeral line is key to demonstrating normal elbow alignment and should be used whenever reading a pediatric elbow radiograph to exclude a subtle supracondylar fracture.
The ruleThe exceptionVideo tutorial See alsoRelated articlesCases and figuresA line drawn down the anterior surface of the humerus should intersect the middle third of the capitellum.
When axial force is applied down the radius (such as after a fall onto an outstretched hand), the radial head impacts the capitellum.
This results in the narrowest and weakest part of the distal humerus is placed under stress.
The result is often fracture through the supracondylar portion of the distal humerus and this usually results in posterior displacement of the capitellum.
Where there is even minor displacement of the capitellum, look for evidence of an elbow effusion, or minor cortical irregularity on the AP and lateral film.
Unfortunately, as with all rules, there are exceptions.
In most children, this rule holds for normal children.
However, there are normal children (usually those under the age of 4) in whom the anterior humeral line passes through the anterior third.
In these cases, look for ancillary signs to suggest elbow trauma.supracondylar fractureelbow effusion

Anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) territory infarcts are much less common than posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA) infarcts.
AICA generally arises from the caudal third of the basilar artery and supplies the lateral pons, inner ear, middle cerebellar peduncle and the anterior inferior cerebellum 4,5.EpidemiologyClinical presentation    PathologyRadiographic featuresSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAICA territory infarcts are rare, comprising ~1% of ischemic cerebellar strokes 2.
Vertigo (can be central or peripheral due to the arterial supply) is the most common symptom associated with an AICA infarct, however, it is normally associated with neurological signs and symptoms such as facial weakness, hypoacusis, facial sensory loss, crossed sensory loss, gait ataxia, limb ataxia and Horner’s syndrome 4-6.
In AICA syndrome, the neurological symptoms described above are the symptoms often seen first 7.Acute interruption of blood flow through the AICA which leads to deprivation of oxygen and glucose in the vascular territory supplied.
This phenomenon triggers a cascade of events at a cellular level, that if the circulation is not restored in time, will lead to cell death.
The main cause of AICA territory stroke is atherosclerosis, but can also be a lacunar infarct due to hypertension or thromboembolism, although sometimes the cause is not known.
Generally, the features are those of brain infarction but in the anterior cerebellar artery vascular territory: middle cerebellar peduncle, inferolateral portion of the pons, flocculus, and anteroinferior surface of the cerebellum.
As such these features are discussed in the generic article: cerebral infarction.lateral pontine syndrome

The anterior inferior cerebellar artery (AICA) is one of three vessels that provides arterial blood supply to the cerebellum.
It has a variable origin, course and supply, with up to 40% of specimens not having an identifiable standard AICA.
The amount of tissue supplied by the AICA is variable (AICA-PICA dominance) but usually includes:middle cerebellar peduncleinferolateral portion of the ponsflocculusanteroinferior surface of the cerebellumcranial nerves VII and VIII99% of AICAs arise from the basilar artery, but where along the vessel is variable:75% lower third16% middle third9% vertebrobasilar junctioninternal auditory branch (80% single, 20% double) passes into the IAMlateral branch passes around the flocculus and into the hemispheric fissure (supplying both superior and inferior semilunar lobules)medial branch supplies the biventral lobuleBefore cross-sectional imaging, the AICA (along with venous displacement) was used to identify posterior fossa intra- or extra-axial masses, especially at the CP angle.
Extra-axial masses (e.g. vestibular schwannomas or meningiomas) would displace the vessel whereas intra-axial masses tend not to.

Anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS) avulsion injuries are one of the six main types of pelvic apophyseal avulsion fractures.
Subacute or chronic avulsion injuries can be mistaken for a pseudotumor.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAs with many pelvic avulsion injuries, they most often occur in adolescents (mostly between the ages 14-17).
There is a slight male predilection and they tend to occur most often in sports involving kicking.
The straight head of the rectus femoris muscle originates from the AIIS and forceful extension at the hip joint can lead to an avulsion injury at this point.
The mechanism is one of forced hip extension with the knee in flexion 4.The avulsed bony fragment may not be as obvious on the AP projection.
An oblique projection can be utilized to demonstrate the fragment in profile.
Almost all cases are managed conservatively.

The anterior inferior iliac spine (AIIS) is bony prominence on the anterior border of the ilium forming the superior border of the acetabulum.
Attachments include the Iliacus, origin of straight head of the rectus femoris, and also the proximal ileofemoral ligament (Y-ligament or ligament of Bigelow).
It is a useful anatomical landmark: needle puncture of hip joint may be approached 5 cm below the ASIS and aiming superomedially.
anterior inferior iliac spine avulsion injury

The intercostal spaces are supplied by pairs of posterior and anterior intercostal arteries.
The 1st to 6th anterior intercostal arteries arise directly from the lateral aspect of the internal thoracic artery.
The 7th to 9th arise from the musculophrenic artery, a branch of the internal thoracic artery.
In each intercostal space, the anterior intercostal artery divides into paired branches:the larger (main) branch courses laterally in the upper aspect of their respective intercostal space between the internal and innermost intercostal muscles, below the intercostal vein and above the intercostal nerve (mnemonic "VAN"), protected by the costal groove of the rib above.the smaller (collateral) branch descends into the lower aspect of their respective intercostal space and courses laterally between the internal and innermost intercostal arteries.
Here they are not offered protection by the rib above.
In the 2 most inferior intercostal spaces (10th and 11th spaces), the anterior intercostal artery is absent, with the posterior intercostal artery supplying each space solely.
As these arteries course laterally within the intercostal spaces, they give off a variable number of small perforating cutaneous branches.
In the lateral aspect of the thoracic wall, the artery anastomoses with branches of the posterior intercostal artery.
Along with the posterior intercostal arteries, the anterior intercostal arteries supply the muscles and skin within the intercostal spaces as well as the parietal pleura.

The anterior interosseous artery is one of the two branches of the short common interosseous artery (from the ulnar artery).
The artery courses deep in the anterior compartment of the forearm on the anterior surface of the interosseous membrane along with the anterior interosseous nerve (from the median nerve).
It runs between flexor digitorum profundus (medially) and flexor pollicis longus (laterally) muscles supplying both.
It gives off several small branches that pierce the interosseous membrane, supplying the deep extensor muscles within the posterior compartment of the forearm.
Small nutrient vessels also supply the radius and ulna.
At the upper border of pronator quadratus, the artery:gives off a small branch to anastomose with the palmar carpal arch and,pierces the interosseous membrane to enter the posterior compartment of the forearm and anastomoses with the posterior interosseous artery which continues distally to join the dorsal carpal arch.

Anterior interosseous nerve syndrome (AINS), also known as Kiloh-Nevin syndrome, is one of three common median nerve entrapment syndromes; the other two being pronator teres syndrome and the far more common carpal tunnel syndrome.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosis History and etymologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAINS is a rare entrapment syndrome, with comparatively little robust epidemiological data.
AINS is said to account for less than 1% of neuropathies of the upper limb 1.AINS is a pure motor neuropathy, as the anterior interosseous nerve contains no sensory fibers; dull forearm pain is however sometimes mentioned by patients.
Typically, patients fail to make an “O.K.”-sign, as flexion of the interphalangeal joint of the thumb and the distal interphalangeal joint of the index finger is impaired.
Another sensitive test is the pinch test: a patient with AINS will also not be able to pinch a sheet of paper between his thumb and index finger, instead clamping the sheet between his extended thumb and index fingers, akin to a tong rather than a clamp.
Weakness of the pronator quadratus muscle manifests itself in pronation weakness with a flexed elbow 2.AINS can be confounded by the Martin-Gruber anastomosis, present in up to 25% of the population: in these cases, the anterior interosseous nerve gives off branches to the ulnar nerve, creating atypical motor innervation patterns of the forearm and hand and thus effacing the typical clinical symptoms.
The etiology is highly debated.
Two common causes of AINS are compression neuropathy and brachial plexus neuritis 4.AINS can be caused by compression between the heads of the pronator teres muscle and the proximal edge of the FDS arch.
The anterior interosseous nerve is furthermore prone to entrapment by anatomical variants, Gantzer’s muscle, an anoumalous head of the FPL (flexor pollicis longus muscle) 1, being the most noteworthy, as it is found in up to 52% of the population 2.In complete AINS, the flexor pollicis longus (FPL), the radial part (2nd and 3rd digit) of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) and pronator quadratus (PQ) are affected.
Ultrasound and MRI are the two imaging modalities which best lend themselves to investigating entrapment syndromes.
Next to directly visualizing direct causes [e.g. primary nerve or sheath tumors, ganglion cysts, osseous spurs, anatomical variants (e.g. Gantzer muscle), recognizing pathological muscle signal patterns on MRI can inversely point to the affected nerve.
Look for the pattern of muscle signal changes on fluid-sensitive (STIR, PD or T2w fat sat) sequences to uncover the affected nerve.
In AINS, the flexor pollicis longus (FPL), the radial part (2nd and 3rd digit) of the flexor digitorum profundus (FDP) and pronator quadratus (PQ) will be accordingly affected.
In chronic cases, additional hyperintense signal changes can occur on T1w imaging secondary to lipomatous atrophy.
Care must be taken in assessing the PQ muscle, however: hyperintense signal here has been shown to be a frequent normal finding of unclear etiology 2.Although not strictly necessary in secondary entrapment syndromes (i.e. those not caused by space-occupying lesions etc.),
intravenous application of contrast medium will show enhancement of denervated muscles.
AINS can be treated conservatively with extremity rest and NSAR; corticosteroids have been used, as well.
Surgical success rates is about 73% in one series 3.Anterior interosseous nerve syndrome must be differentially diagnosed from:other median nerve entrapment syndromescarpal tunnel syndromepronator teres syndromecarpal tunnel syndromepronator teres syndromeAnterior interosseous nerve syndrome (Kiloh-Nevin syndrome) was first described in 1948 by Parsonage and Turner and further defined in 1952 by Kiloh and Nevin 4.median nerve entrapment syndromespronator teres syndromecarpal tunnel syndromeanterior interosseous nerve syndromepronator teres syndromecarpal tunnel syndromeanterior interosseous nerve syndrome

The anterior interosseous nerve also known as the volar interosseous nerve arises from the median nerve in the forearm, and supplies the flexor pollicis longus, pronator quadratus and the lateral portion of flexor digitorum profundus.
The anterior interosseous nerve continues as a major branch of the median nerve and receives fibers from the C5-T1 spinal nerve roots.
The anterior interosseous nerve arises from the median nerve as it passes between the two heads of the pronator teres muscle.
It then descends vertically on the anterior aspect of the interosseous membrane between flexor digitorum profundus and flexor pollicis longus.
The nerve then passes deep to the pronator quadratus muscle, which it supplies.
The anterior interosseous nerve sends articular branches to the anterior aspect of the wrist.
The anterior interosseous nerve supplies the deep layer of the muscles in the anterior compartment of the forearm.
These are:lateral part of flexor digitorum profundus (which has insertions at the 2nd and 3rd phalanges)flexor pollicis longuspronator quadratusThe anterior interosseous nerve provides sensory fibers to the carpals, however does not have cutaneous branches.
The anterior interosseous nerve runs with the anterior interosseous artery (from the ulnar artery) and corresponding veins, which also pass along the anterior aspect of the interosseous membrane.
The anterior interosseous nerve may be compressed along its course most commonly at the tendinous edge of the deep head of the pronator teres muscle, causing anterior interosseous nerve syndrome.

The anterior jugular vein is a paired tributary of the external jugular vein.
It arises beneath the chin in the region of the hyoid bone or suprahyoid neck.
The anterior jugular vein has its origin as the confluence of several small superficial submandibular veins.
It descends near the midline, medial to the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoid muscle and in its inferior path, superior to the sternum, is connected to the contralateral anterior jugular vein by the jugular (venous) arch.
It terminates by passing deep to sternocleidomastoid muscle to drain into the external jugular vein.
The vein often receives tributaries from:laryngeal veinssmall thyroid veinsIt lies superficial to the sternocleidomastoid muscle, and superficial to the infrahyoid (strap) muscles.it may drain into the subclavian vein directly

The anterior junction (or junctional) line is a feature of frontal chest radiographs and chest CTs.
It is a result of the parietal and visceral pleura meeting anteromedially.
It normally contains a small amount of fat but can form a stripe of variable thickness if there is a lot of fat present or by the presence of the thymus in young patients 1.Anterior mediastinal masses can cause obliteration of the anterior junction line 3.
Occasionally the anterior junction line may mimic pneumomediastinum, so called pseudopneumomediastinum.seen on ~40% (range 25-57%) of frontal chest x-rays 1oblique course crossing the upper two-thirds of the sternum from the upper right to lower left 1,2 and does not extend above the manubriosternal joint 3seen as a thin, dense line separating the two lungs in the anterosuperior portion of the chest 2

There are three anterior knee fat pads 1:infrapatellar fat pad (of Hoffa)fills the space between the patella ligament and the anterior intercondylar area of the tibia 2posterior suprapatellar (prefemoral or supratrochlear) fat padanterior suprapatellar (quadriceps) fat padfills the space between the suprapatellar recess and the quadriceps tendon 3fills the space between the patella ligament and the anterior intercondylar area of the tibia 2fills the space between the suprapatellar recess and the quadriceps tendon 3fat pad impingement syndrome of the knee

Anterior knee pain is common with a variety of causes which can be divided anatomically using a layered approach1 from superficial to deep:prepatellar bursitisMorel-Lavallée lesioninfrapatellar bursitis quadriceps tendinosis / partial tearquadriceps tendon rupturepatella fracturepatellar sleeve fracturesSinding-Larsen-Johansson diseasepatellar tumorspatellar tendinosis / partial tearpatellar tendon rupturetibial tuberosity avulsion fractureOsgood-Schlatter diseasepatellofemoral instabilitylateral patellar dislocationexcessive lateral pressure syndromefat pad impingement syndromesinfrapatella fat pad impingementquadriceps fat pad impingementpara-articular chondroma of the infrapatellar fat padinfrapatella fat pad herniationcyclops lesionganglion / parameniscal cystiliotibial band friction syndromeinfrapatella fat pad impingementquadriceps fat pad impingementplica syndromesmediopatellar plicasuprapatellar plicainfrapatellar plica (ligamentum mucosum) patellofemoral osteoarthrosispatellofemoral chondromalaciainflammatory and depositional arthritislipoma arborescenspigmented villonodular synovitisfocal nodular synovitissynovial chondromatosismediopatellar plicasuprapatellar plicainfrapatellar plica (ligamentum mucosum) patellofemoral chondromalacia

An anterior labroligamentous periosteal sleeve avulsion (ALPSA) lesion is similar to a Bankart lesion, in that it too is usually due to anterior shoulder dislocation and involves the anterior inferior labrum.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosis See alsoReferencesCases and figuresIt is often the result of chronic injury rather than acute dislocation; the incidence of ALPSA lesions increases in patients with multiple dislocations.
An ALPSA lesion refers to a detachment of the anteroinferior labrum from the glenoid.
The scapular periosteum is unruptured but widely lifted or stripped.
The labrum remains attached to the periosteum and can rotate medially to a position along the anterior surface of the scapular neck.
The clue to identifying an ALPSA lesion is the medial displacement and inferior shifting of the inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) complex.
A Hill-Sachs lesion may be seen in association.
May show contrast material entering a cleft between the anteroinferior glenoid and the labrum.
The labral tissue is detached with the periosteal attachment stripped without tearing.
Unlike the Bankart lesion in which the labrum and glenoid periosteum are avulsed from the underlying glenoid, an ALPSA lesion involves mobilization of the labrum which remains attached to the periosteum overlying the glenoid (thus sleeve).
As a result, an ALPSA lesion may heal (as opposed to a Bankart lesion which does not), however it can do so in an abnormal position requiring identification and early surgical repair.
GLAD lesionPerthes lesion

The anterior lacrimal crest is a bony projection on the frontal process of the maxilla continuous with the orbital rim which creates the lateral margin of the lacrimal sac fossa.
The medial palpebral ligament is attached to anterior lacrimal crest.
Immediately anterior to the anterior lacrimal crest, there is a small groove called "sutura notha".
It contains a small branch of infraorbital artery which can potentially cause significant bleed if it is cut inadvertently during dissecting this region.

The anterior lateral malleolar artery is the counterpart to the anterior medial malleolar artery, supplies the lateral aspect of the ankle.
branch of anterior tibial arteryruns posterior to the tendons of extensor digitorum longus and fibularis tertius to the lateral side of the ankle and anastomoses with the perforating branch of the fibular artery and ascending branches of the lateral tarsal arterylateral side of the ankle

The anterior left perihepatic (or subhepatic) space is a potential space located between the diaphragm and the anterosuperior aspect of the left lobe of the liver.
The anterior left perihepatic space is separated from the posterior left perihepatic space by the left lobe of the liver; both are subcompartments of the left supramesocolic space.medial: falciform ligamentposterior: bare area on left lobe of liver, left coronary ligamentanterior: diaphragm 1superolaterally: with the anterior left subphrenic spaceposteriorly: with the posterior left perihepatic spaceinferiorly: with the remainder of the peritoneal cavity 1

The anterior left subphrenic space is a potential space between the fundus of the stomach and the left hemidiaphragm 1,2.The anterior left subphrenic space is a subcompartment of the left supramesocolic space.medial: falciform ligament (separates it from the anterior right subphrenic space)superior: left coronary and triangular ligamentsanterior: anterior abdominal wall and anterior aspect of the left hemidiaphragmposterior: left lobe of the liver 3,4inferiorly: the greater peritoneal cavityinferomedially: anterior left perihepatic spaceposteriorly: posterior left subphrenic space 5The anterior left subphrenic space is the most frequent location of abscess development secondary to generalized peritonitis 6.

Anterior lenticonus is present when the anterior surface of the ocular lens assumes a conical shape.
It can be unilateral or bilateral.
Bilateral anterior lenticonus is associated with Alport syndrome.
Decreased visual activity and irregular refraction that cannot be corrected by either spectacle or contact lenses.

Anterior lumbar interbody fusion (ALIF) is a spinal fusion procedure usually performed at L5/S1 or L4/5.
It is carried out either via a transabdominal or lateral retroperitoneal approach.
A discectomy is performed, an interbody spacer introduced and fixed in place with screws with or without a supporting plate (depending on the hardware design) 1.
In some instances, the procedure needs to be combined with posterior instrumented fusion with pedicle screws and rods 1.

Germ cell tumors are one of the causes of anterior mediastinal mass, and any of the germ cell histologies may be identified.
They can therefore be divided histologically into:seminomanon-seminomatous germ cell tumors (NSGCT)embryonal cell carcinomachoriocarcinomayolk sac tumorteratoma: most commonmixed germ cell tumorembryonal cell carcinomachoriocarcinomayolk sac tumorteratoma: most commonmixed germ cell tumorAlternatively, anterior mediastinal germ cell tumors can be thought of as benign and malignant 1:benignmature teratomamature teratoma with an immature component of less than 50% 1malignantall othersmature teratomamature teratoma with an immature component of less than 50% 1all othersMature teratomas are the most frequent histology encountered in the mediastinum (see mediastinal teratoma), and account for ~60% (range 50-70%) of all mediastinal germ cell tumors 2.It is difficult to distinguish between the various malignant histologies, and clinical correlation with serum tumor markers (AFP, beta-HCG) and biopsy are usually required.

The anterior longitudinal ligament (ALL) runs along the anterior surface of the vertebral bodies (firmly united to the periosteum) and intervertebral discs (attaching to the anterior annulus).
It ascends from the anterosuperior portion of the sacrum superiorly to the become the anterior atlanto-occipital membrane at the level of the anterior arch of C1 (atlas) 1-6.
Can be divided into three distinct layers 2,3.superficial: traverses 3-4 vertebraeintermediate: covers 2-3 vertebraedeepbetween individual vertebrae, it either blends into the periosteum or inserts anteriorlythe first ALL layer is typically affected in DISH 4between individual vertebrae, it either blends into the periosteum or inserts anteriorlythe first ALL layer is typically affected in DISH 4

Anterior medial malleolar artery is the counterpart to the anterior lateral malleolar artery, and supplies the medial aspect of the ankle.branch of anterior tibial arteryarises approximately 5 cm proximal to the anklepasses posterior to the tendons of extensor hallucis longus and tibialis anterior medial to the joint, where it joins branches of the posterior tibial and medial plantar arteriesmedial side of the ankle

Getting a film with an anterior mediastinal mass in the exam is one of the many exam set-pieces that can be prepared for.
The film goes up and after a couple of seconds pause, you need to start talking:CXRCTNotesSee alsoCases and figuresThere is a left sided mediastinal mass that makes obtuse angles with the mediastinal contour.
The hilar vessels can be seen through the mass - this is the hilum overlay sign and means this is not in the middle mediastinum.
The paravertebral line can also be seen, placing this mass in the anterior mediastinum.
The differential includes lymphoma, thyroid malignancy, thymoma and teratoma and the age of the patient and accompanying clinical symptoms and signs would help order the list.
I would notify the referring clinician urgently and suggest a CT scan to assist diagnosis and assess the extent of disease.
Selected axial and sagittal slices from a contrast enhanced CT chest.
This confirms that the mass is in the anterior mediastinum.
There are fatty and calcific components suggesting a diagnosis of teratoma.
A CT-guided biopsy could be performed to confirm the diagnosis.when the CT goes up - don't go back to the beginning.
Use the phrase "this confirms..."where there is fat and calcification in an anterior mediastinal mass, think teratomain lymphoma, Hodgkin's disease is more common in younger patients with lymphadenopathy isolated to the chestchest radiograph in the exam settingnormal contours of the cardiomediastinum on chest radiography

The anterior mediastinum is the portion of the mediastinum anterior to the pericardium and below the thoracic plane.
It forms the anterior part of the inferior mediastinum, and contains the thymus, lymph nodes, and may contain the portions of a retrosternal thyroid.
The commonest pathology encountered within the anterior mediastinum is an anterior mediastinal mass.
However, diffuse mediastinal disease may also occur.

The anterior (or external) nares (singular: naris) (or nostrils) form the entrance to the nose.
Each naris is formed by a ring of structures:medially the columella (soft tissue anteroinferior portion of the nasal septum)laterally and superiorly the nasal alainferiorly the nasal sillBy virtue of the actions of the compressor naris and the dilatator naris muscles the nostrils are narrowed or flared respectively.

The anterior pararenal space is the portion of the retroperitoneum that lies between the posterior surface of the parietal peritoneum and the anterior reflection of the perirenal fascia.
It contains the duodenum, pancreas and retroperitoneal segments of the ascending and descending colon.
It also contains the roots of the small bowel mesentery and transverse mesocolon.medially: there is continuity with the contralateral anterior pararenal space although in most cases, fluid will lateralize to the side of pathologylaterally: the compartment is limited as the lateroconal fascia and parietal peritoneum mergesuperiorly: fluid may extend to the dome of the diaphragm immediately posterior to the esophagus and phrenicoesophageal ligamentinferiorly: fluid may extend to the iliac fossa, from there into the pelvis and potentially to the rectus sheath, around the round ligament or ductus deferens and even into the femoral sheathThere is a paucity of fat within the compartment and therefore, it is difficult to identify on CT or MRI in patients with no additional pathology.
When fluid collects within the anterior pararenal space it becomes easier to identify on CT or MRI.
Additionally, because the perirenal fascia is bilaminated, fluid in the compartment can dissect between the anterior and posterior fascia and sit behind the kidney.
Additionally, fluid can dissect along ligaments and mesenteries to lie in the subperitoneal space, e.g. gastrosplenic ligament, transverse mesocolon and greater omentum.

The anterior perforated substance, or substantia perforata anterior, is an area in the basal forebrain that plays an important role with regards to the blood supply of deep grey matter structures of the brain.
Gross anatomyArterial supplyHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesLocated within the basal forebrain, the anterior perforated substance is a quadrilateral area of grey matter positioned posterior to the gyrus rectus and olfactory trigone and anterolateral to the optic tract.
It is bounded medially by the optic chiasm and laterally by the lateral olfactory striae.
Blood supply is by the medial and lateral lenticulostriate arteries that arise from the anterior and middle cerebral arteries.
It derives its name from the numerous small holes created by lenticulostriate arteries, perforating arteries of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries which travel through this area and supply the internal capsule and the structures of the basal ganglia.

The anterior pituitary (or adenohypophysis) is by far the largest part of the pituitary gland, and is responsible for synthesis and release of most pituitary hormones (with the exception of oxytocin and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) which are released by the posterior pituitary).It consists of 3 parts:The pars distalis is the largest part of the pituitary gland.
It forms from the anterior wall of Rathke pouch.
It is composed of cords of epithelial cells individually specialized to secrete tropic hormones acting on target organs:The pars tuberalis is the part of the adenohypophysis which surrounds the anterior aspect of the infundibular stalk.
The pars intermedia in a thin layer of epithelial cells located between pars distalis and neurohypophysis.
It arises from the posterior wall of Rathke pouch and contains vestigial lumina of Rathke pouch which appear as narrow vesicles of variable length.
These may give rise to Rathke celft cysts (also known as pars intermedia cysts 2-3).
For relations and blood supply, please see the main pituitary gland article here.

The anterior pontine membrane is an arachnoid membrane located anteriorly in the posterior fossa to the side of the basilar artery, separating the prepontine cistern (medially) form the cerebellopontine cistern (laterally) 1.

The anterior ramus of the lateral sulcus, is located at the very anterior end of the lateral sulcus (sylvian fissure), just anterior to the ascending ramus, and passes superiorly into the inferior frontal gyrus separating the pars orbitalis form the pars triangularis of the frontal operculum.
The anterior ramus is also sometimes referred to as the anterior horizontal ramus, so as not to confuse it with the ascending ramus which is sometimes known as the anterior ascending ramus.

Anterior resection syndrome refers to wide spectrum of symptoms which develop post-sphincter preserving rectal resection for rectal cancer.
Pelvic radiotherapy is a known risk factor to develop anterior resection syndrome.
Symptoms include but are not limited to:increased bowel frequencyconstipationfecal incontinenceincomplete evacuationincreased intestinal gasMRI of the pelvis, including dynamic sequences, is recommended to exclude other causes for altered bowel function.
In rare cases the symptoms are so severe that colostomy formation is performed.

The anterior right subhepatic space is a potential space between the inferior surface of the right lobe of the liver and the transverse colon.
The anterior right subhepatic space is separated from Morison’s pouch (also known as the posterior right subhepatic space) by the transverse mesocolon, both are subcompartments of the right supramesocolic space.inferior and posterior: transverse colon and transverse mesocolon  superior: inferior surface of the right lobe of the liverlateral: right lateral abdominal wallThe anterior right subhepatic space is continuous laterally with the right subphrenic space, inferiorly with the right paracolic gutter and posteriorly with Morison’s pouch.
Free fluid, such as ascitic fluid or blood, can collect in the anterior right subhepatic space and is detectable by ultrasound or computed tomography 1.

Anterior sacral meningocele is a congenital defect seen in the anterior aspect of the spine.
It is defined as a meningeal cyst that occurs in the presacral space secondary to agenesis of a portion of the anterior sacrum.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresIn approximately 50% of cases, associated malformations are found, including 2:spina bifidaspinal dysraphismbicornuate uterusimperforate anusIt can occur as part of the Currarino triad 3.Scimitar sacrum is a classically described finding on plain film.
General imaging differential considerations include:tail gut duplication cystpre-sacral neurenteric cystmeningoceles

The anterior capsular insertion, unlike the posterior aspect of the shoulder joint capsule which has a constant scapular attachment along the margins of the glenoid labrum, inserts a variable distance from the labrum.
The capsular insertions are classified as follows:type I: at or very near the labrumtype II: just medial to the labrum, within 1 cmtype III: more than 1 cm medial to the labrumType III is associated with shoulder instability, and can either be congenital or secondary to anterior shoulder dislocation.

Anterior shoulder dislocation is by far the commonest type of dislocation and usually results from forced abduction, external rotation and extension 1.
EpidemiologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisBroadly speaking, anterior shoulder dislocations occur in a bimodal age distribution.
The first, and by far the more prevalent age group are young adult men who have sustained high-energy injuries to the shoulder.
The second group is older patients who have been injured with a much lower level of violence.
In older patients, the dislocation usually proves to be an isolated event 3.flattened: shallow anterior/anteroinferior glenoid bony contour: may predispose to recurrent dislocations 5Anterior dislocations can be further divided according to where the humeral head comes to lie:subcoracoid: most commonsubglenoidsubclavicularintrathoracic: very rareIn anterior dislocations, the humeral head comes to lie anterior, medial and somewhat inferior to its normal location and glenoid fossa.
Anterior shoulder dislocations are usually managed with closed reduction and a period of immobilization (e.g. 6 weeks) to allow adequate capsular healing, although whether this significantly changes the likelihood of recurrent dislocation is not certain 4.
The key to successful healing and normal eventual function is a structured course of physical therapy aimed at reducing muscle wasting and maintaining mobility.
The emphasis, especially early on, is on isometric exercises, which the glenohumeral joint remains immobilized 4.
Surgical repair is not required for dislocation per se, but rather to treat complications and associated injuries which include: shoulder instability due to damage to the inferior glenohumeral ligament (IGHL) Hill-Sachs lesionBankart lesion or other anterior glenolabral injuriesdamage to the axillary artery, or brachial plexusintraarticular loose bodyupper extremity dislocationsshoulder dislocationposterior shoulder dislocationinferior shoulder dislocationshoulder dislocationposterior shoulder dislocationinferior shoulder dislocationposterior shoulder dislocationinferior shoulder dislocation

The anterior spinal artery supplies the anterior portion of the spinal cord and arises from the vertebral artery in the region of the medulla oblongata.
The two vertebral arteries (one of which is usually bigger than the other) anastamose in the midline to form a single anterior spinal artery at the level of the foramen magnum.
Gross anatomyVariationsRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIt descends along the anterior surface of the spinal cord, within the anterior median fissure and is covered by pia mater which creates a sheath (linea splendens).
Along its course, it is reinforced by other branches that enter the spinal canal via the intervertebral foraminae.
Although communication exists at multiple levels, the supply of the cord can be thought of as occurring in three relatively separate sections, supplied by somewhat predictable feeders 4.
C1 - T3anterior segmental medullary arteries (branches of the vertebral artery) at ~C3ascending cervical artery (the branch of the inferior thyroid artery) at ~C6-C7T3 - T7posterior intercostal arteries at ~T7T8 - conusartery of Adamkiewicz usually between T9 to T12cone artery aka artery of Desproges-Gotteron (branch from iliolumbar arteries) anterior segmental medullary arteries (branches of the vertebral artery) at ~C3ascending cervical artery (the branch of the inferior thyroid artery) at ~C6-C7posterior intercostal arteries at ~T7artery of Adamkiewicz usually between T9 to T12cone artery aka artery of Desproges-Gotteron (branch from iliolumbar arteries) The anterior spinal artery communicates sporadically with the posterior spinal arteries via a pial plexus that encases the cord.
At most levels it gives off a sulcal artery which enters the anterior median fissure.
See spinal cord blood supply.
Variation of the anterior spinal artery origin include5duplication / two independent anterior spinal arteriessingle origin of anterior spinal artery from unilateral vertebral arterysingle or duplicate anterior spinal arteries arising off vascular arcade between vertebral arteriesmedial medullary syndromeanterior spinal artery syndrome

The anterior spinal commissure connects the left and right sides of the spinal cord anteriorly.
It is located between the posterior-most extent of the anterior median fissure anteriorly and the ventral grey matter commissure posteriorly 1.
It is composed of anterior and lateral spinothalamic tract fibers and anterior corticospinal tract 1,2.
The anterior spinal commissure is sometimes referred to as the ventral white matter spinal commissure to distinguish it from the ventral grey matter commissure located immediately posterior to it, being part of the periependymal grey matter around the central canal of the spinal cord 1.

The anterior spinothalamic tract, also known as the ventral spinothalamic fasciculus, is an ascending pathway located anteriorly within the spinal cord, primarily responsible for transmitting coarse touch and pressure.
The lateral spinothalamic tract (discussed separately), in contrast, primarily transmits pain and temperature.
First-order neurons, whose cell bodies are in the dorsal root ganglion and whose axons extend from peripheral receptors, enter the cord via dorsal nerve roots.
The aforementioned first-order neurons synapse with second-order neurons whose bodies are located in the ipsilateral dorsal horn of the cord.
In contrast to the lateral spinothalamic tract, whose fibers decussate almost immediately, these second-order neurons' axons ascend a few levels before crossing via the anterior spinal commissure and form the anterior spinothalamic tract 1-3.The anterior spinothalamic tract lies in the anterior funiculus, medial to where the ventral spinal roots exit.
It overlaps the vestibulospinal tract.
Fibers of this tract are somatotopically organized for their entire course.
Upon reaching the brainstem, the anterior and lateral spinothalamic tracts combine to form the spinal lemniscus, which runs lateral to the medial lemniscus.4 The spinal lemniscus terminates in the ventral posterior nucleus of the thalamus.
Here, it synapses with third-order neurons, which project to the primary somatosensory area on the ipsilateral side of the cerebral cortex.syringomyeliaintramedullary spinal tumorspinal cord injuryBrown-Séquard syndrometransverse myelitis

Anterior subluxation of the cervical spine, also known as hyperflexion sprain, is a ligamentous injury of the cervical spine.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresPatients present with severe, focal neck pain.
There may be neurological symptoms due to spinal cord injury.
Anterior subluxation of the cervical spine results from posterior ligamentous complex injury, however, there may be an associated posterior intervertebral disc injury and compression fractures of the anterior vertebral bodies 1-3.
Causes include motor vehicle collisions (most common), diving into shallow water, falls and direct trauma 3.
may be normalfocal kyphosis at the site of ligament disruptionhelps to differentiate the condition from diffuse reversal of cervical lordosisincreased interspinous distanceconcerned disc space shows reduced height anteriorly and increased height posteriorlymild anterolisthesis may be notedhelps to differentiate the condition from diffuse reversal of cervical lordosisMRI can demonstrate disruption of ligaments, including posterior longitudinal ligament, ligamentum flavum and interspinous ligaments:soft tissue edema is usually present: commonly in the interspinous spacespinal cord edema may be seen: usually results from traumatic disc herniation rather than compression by bone

The anterior superior alveolar canal courses through the anterior wall of the maxillary sinus, and contains the anterior superior alveolar nerve, artery and vein.
Usually, it shares a common channel with the infraorbital canal but when seen separately should not be confused for a fracture.

The anterior superior alveolar​ nerve, also known as the anterior superior dental nerve, is the third branch of the infra-orbital nerve, from the maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve.
It is the largest of the superior alveolar nerves and contributes to the superior dental plexus.
It arises from the infra-orbital nerve whilst in the infra-orbital canal just before it exits the infra-orbital foramen.
It descends in the anterior wall of the maxillary sinus in the anterior superior alveolar canal and terminal dental branches enter the apical foramina at the dental roots.
The nerves supply the maxillary sinus, anterior maxillary oral mucosa, the incisor and canine teeth and the lower lateral nasal wall.

Anterior superior iliac spine (ASIS) avulsion injuries typically occur in athletes during forceful muscular contraction.
ASIS is the site of attachment for sartorius and tensor fascia latae muscles.
ASIS avulsion, like other pelvic avulsion injuries, is a stable fracture.
These can usually be treated on an outpatient basis with crutches, analgesics, and modified activity.
Spontaneous recovery usually occurs within 4-to-6 weeks.
Occasionally, surgical intervention is required to remove painful fragments or to regain anatomic fixation.

The anterior superior iliac spine is an important bony surface landmark and is the prominence is the most anterior part of the ilium.
It can be palpated at the lateral end of the inguinal fold.
Attachments include the inguinal ligament, sartorius and depending on which resource you read, the tensor fasciae latae.
Clinically, as an easily identifiable landmark, it aids in the localization of the inguinal ligament, common femoral artery and the base of the appendix (McBurney's point).
It is also the start point for the measurement of true leg length (anterior superior iliac spine to medial malleolus).anterior superior iliac spine avulsion injury

Anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) injury is the most common of the ligament injuries that can occur as part of the lateral ligament complex injuries 2.
The injuries can comprise either soft tissue tears, avulsion fractures or both.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisATFL injuries typically occur with an inversion injury to the ankle, either with or without plantar flexion.
Approximately two-thirds of ankle sprains tend to be isolated injuries to the ATFL (the ATFL is the weakest ligament in the lateral collateral complex of the ankle).
There is general agreement that avulsion is more common at the fibular than the talar end of the ligament 2.AMA classification 8,9:grade I: ligament stretchgrade IIpartial tearpartial loss of movementmild to moderate joint instabilitygrade IIIcomplete tearinability to bear weightsignificant joint instabilitypartial tearpartial loss of movementmild to moderate joint instabilitycomplete tearinability to bear weightsignificant joint instabilityMany orthopedists favor a functional approach based on clinical examination:grade I: stable injuryprovocative maneuvers do not elicit increased upper ankle joint laxityno ligament in the lateral complex is completely rupturedgrade II: unstableruptured ATFLincreased upper ankle joint laxitygrade III: unstableruptured calcaneofibular ligament (CFL)increased upper ankle joint laxityprovocative maneuvers do not elicit increased upper ankle joint laxityno ligament in the lateral complex is completely rupturedruptured ATFLincreased upper ankle joint laxityruptured calcaneofibular ligament (CFL)increased upper ankle joint laxityThere are other grading systems, of course, such as the anatomic classification or grading by clinical presentation symptoms 9.Many show an associated avulsion fracture at either the fibular end or, less commonly, the talar end.
May show ancillary features such as an ankle joint effusion and/or overlying lateral malleolar soft tissue swelling.
Has been shown to have high sensitivity and specificity rates for chronic ATFL tears 6.Both the anterior and posterior talofibular ligaments are usually seen on a single axial image obtained slightly distal to the tibiofibular ligaments 4.MRI may show discontinuity, detachment, thickening, thinning, irregularity of the ligament, a bright rim sign 5 or an associated bony avulsion.
Heterogeneity with increased intraligamentous signal intensity on fat-suppressed or T2-weighted images is indicative of intrasubstance edema or hemorrhage.
T2fluid within the joint serves to highlight the anterior talofibular ligament on T2-weighted imagesthe ligament appears as a thin, straight, low signal intensity band extending from the talus to the fibular malleolusa bright rim sign (cortical defect with a bright dot-like or curvilinear high signal intensity lesion) may be seen on T2 weighted imagingfluid within the joint serves to highlight the anterior talofibular ligament on T2-weighted imagesthe ligament appears as a thin, straight, low signal intensity band extending from the talus to the fibular malleolusa bright rim sign (cortical defect with a bright dot-like or curvilinear high signal intensity lesion) may be seen on T2 weighted imagingOn MRI consider:anterolateral impingement syndrome of ankle 4repetitive synovial inflammation secondary to chronic lateral ankle instability produces a soft-tissue “mass” consisting of hypertrophic synovial tissue and fibrosis within the lateral gutterrepetitive synovial inflammation secondary to chronic lateral ankle instability produces a soft-tissue “mass” consisting of hypertrophic synovial tissue and fibrosis within the lateral gutter

The anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) is part of the lateral collateral ligament complex of the ankle.
Its role is to stabilize the talus.
It is also the weakest of the lateral collateral ankle ligaments.
Gross anatomyVariant anatomyRadiographic appearanceRelated pathologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe ATFL is an intracapsular flat two-banded ligament that arises from the distal anterior tip of the lateral malleolus passing anteromedially to the lateral aspect of the talus at the talar neck.
It normally measures 6-10 mm long and 2 mm thick.
The ATFL is classically described as having two bands, but it may be a single band or three bands.
One small cadaveric study put the prevalence of a two-band ATFL at ~50% 3.T1: uniformly low signal and thickness 4T2: uniformly low signal and thickness 4most commonly injured lateral ligament in ankle sprains 1ATFL injury

The anterior temporal artery is usually a branch of the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery (MCA) that curves out of the Sylvian fissure and runs over the temporal lobe to supply the anterior third of the superior, middle and inferior temporal gyri.
The temporopolar artery, which supplies the temporal pole, usually arises separately from the M1 segment of MCA, however, it may arise as a branch from the anterior temporal artery 1.

Anterior temporal lobe perivascular spaces are recently recognized special variants of tumefactive perivascular spaces, which can mimic cystic tumors with surrounding edema.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresA predilection for women has been reported 1.
Age range is wide, from 24 to 86 years old reported 1.As is the case with perivascular spaces elsewhere, no symptoms directly attributable to the lesion are usually identified 1.Unlike tumefactive perivascular spaces elsewhere within the brain, anterior temporal lobe perivascular spaces often have surrounding edema (~80%) which can range from mild to extensive 1.
Additionally, they are usually associated with a branch of the middle cerebral artery and a focal region of cortical thinning or absence (~90%) 1.
Otherwise, they have similar appearances to perivascular spaces elsewhere: internal CSF signal on all sequences and no enhancement 1,2.The size of the cyst invariably remains stable.
Surrounding edema, however, can change over time in a small percentage of cases, either increasing or decreasing in conspicuity 1,2.No treatment is required provided that they are recognized as perivascular spaces.
Change in the size of the cyst or presence of enhancement should make one doubt the diagnosis.
In some instances, particularly those with increasing edema, a biopsy may be required to exclude a tumor.
Care must be taken, however, as reactive astrocytosis can be mistaken for a glial tumor leading to further surgery and treatment, especially as the tissue will naturally enough be IDH wildtype.

The anterior tibial artery is the main arterial supply of the anterior compartment of the leg.
The anterior tibial artery arises from the popliteal artery in the popliteal fossa and continues distally as the dorsalis pedis artery.
The popliteal artery usually divides at the distal border of the popliteus muscle into the tibioperoneal trunk and anterior tibial artery.
While still in the posterior compartment of the leg, the anterior tibial artery gives off the:recurrent posterior popliteal arterycircumflex fibular arterySubsequently, it passes through a gap above the interosseous membrane into the anterior compartment of the leg.
Here it lies on the interosseous membrane, lateral to tibialis anterior muscle.
The anterior tibial artery passes in front of the ankle joint and continues as the dorsalis pedis artery onto the dorsum of the foot lateral to the tendon of the extensor hallucis longus and medial to the extensor digitorum longus and deep peroneal nerve.
Branches include:anterior tibial recurrent artery: arises immediately, passes upward in the tibialis anterior muscle to anastomose with lateral genicular branches (of the popliteal artery) at the kneemuscular branchesperforating branches: pass behind extensor digitorum longus, piercing the deep fascia and supplying the skin of the anterior legmedial malleolar artery: anastomoses with the medial malleolar branch of the posterior tibial arterylateral malleolar artery: anastomoses with the perforating branch of the peroneal artery

The anterior tibial translocation sign or anterior drawer sign (a.k.a.
anterior translation of tibia) is seen in cases of complete rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament, and refers to anterior translocation (anterior tibial subluxation) of the tibia relative to the femur of >7 mm 1.

The anterior tibial veins, continuations of the venae comitantes of the dorsalis pedis artery, leave the anterior compartment of the leg between the tibia and fibula and pass through the proximal end of the interosseous membrane.
They unite with the posterior tibial veins to form the popliteal vein at the distal border of the popliteus muscle, as it enters the popliteal fossa.

The anterior triangle forms the anterior compartment of the neck and is separated from the posterior triangle by the sternocleidomastoid muscle.
The triangles of the neck are surgically focused, first described from early dissection-based anatomical studies which predated cross-sectional anatomical description based on imaging (see deep spaces of the neck)..The anterior triangle is an inverted triangle with its base above and the apex pointing downwards at the manubrium of the sternum.
It can be further subdivided into smaller triangles by the crossing of digastric and omohyoid muscles.
The anterior triangle is subdivided into 3 paired triangles and a single midline triangle:Paired triangles:digastric trianglemuscular trianglecarotid triangleSingle midline triangle:submental triangleanterior: median line of the neckposterior: anterior margin of sternocleidomastoidbase: inferior border of the mandibleDetermining the nature or origin of masses in the anterior triangle is difficult clinically.
Radiological investigations are paramount in defining the origin and the extent of these masses.
Head and neck tumors often metastasize to lymph nodes in the neck.
A significant proportion of patients with head and neck malignancy have lymph node metastasis in the neck on presentation.
Therefore understanding the anatomical position of lymph nodes in the neck help to stage the disease and aids in the planning of surgical management.

The anterior tympanic artery is the second named branch of the first part of the maxillary artery.
The vessel passes through the petrotympanic fissure to supply the lining of the middle ear and accompanies the chorda tympani in its course.

The anterior ulnar recurrent artery is a recurrent branch of the proximal ulnar artery that ascends in the anterior medial aspect of the elbow, anterior to the medial epicondyle of the humerus to anastomose with the inferior ulnar collateral artery (from the brachial artery) and contribute to the arterial anastomosis of the elbow.

Anterior vertebral body beaking occurs in a number of conditions and may emanate from the central portion or the lower third of the vertebral body.
Morquio syndrome 1 (middle for Morquio)Hurler syndrome 2achondroplasia 3pseudoachondroplasia 4cretinism 5Down syndromeneuromuscular diseases

The anterolateral ligament of the knee (ALL) is a ligament that is thought to aid with rotational stability of the knee joint.
Some think that its presence (or reconstruction) may result in better outcomes from ACL stabilization surgery 2.
The ligament has also been implied in Segond fractures 3.Gross anatomyFunctionRadiographic featuresHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesorigin: prominence of the lateral femoral epicondyle, slightly anterior to the origin of the lateral collateral ligamentinsertion: anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia (between Gerdy's tubercle and the tip of the fibular head), with firm attachments to the lateral meniscusThe ALL is thought to be involved in rotational stability of the knee, checking internal tibial rotation.
Injury of the ligament is thought to be related to pivot shift injuries.
The normal ligament can be identified with MRI and ultrasound 5,6.
Whether imaging modalities are able to distinguish an injured ligament from an absent ligament is still an area of research.
Thought to have been first described by Paul Segond, a French surgeon, in 1879 7.

The term anterolisthesis refers to anterior displacement (forward slip) of a vertebral body relative to the one below.
Its severity can be graded by the Meyerding classification and its etiology classified according to the Wiltse classification.

The common causes of an anterosuperior mediastinal mass can be remembered by using the mnemonic:5 TsT: thymusT: thyroidT: thoracic aortaT: terrible lymphomaT: teratoma and germ cell tumors - see mediastinal germ cell tumorsTesticular cancer metastasis can represent a sixth T, and there are other rare causes that should be considered.differential of an anterosuperior mediastinal mass

Anthrax is a zoonosis caused by Bacillus Anthracis.
There are four types of anthrax: inhalational anthrax (also known as woolsorter's disease and ragsorter's disease ), cutaneous anthrax, injection anthrax and intestinal anthrax.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresReferencesThe disease burden of anthrax decreased so dramatically in the Western world over the last century that concern about the disease became primarily driven by bioterrorism events, however the disease remains endemic in some parts of the developing world.
More recently there have been outbreaks of the injection form of the disease in intravenous drug users in Europe, particularly Northern Europe 1.
Most cases of anthrax are of the cutaneous form 2.
Cutaneous anthrax is known classically as a disease that forms an eschar.
Inhalational anthrax is described as a disease that causes cough, fever and dyspnea.
Intestinal forms are associated with abdominal pain, although may also cause a pharyngitis.
In rare cases, anthrax can disseminate to the central nervous system and cause meningitis and/or encephalitis.
All forms of anthrax may be fatal.
Bacillus anthracis is found in soil and has a reservoir in animals.
Although animals are typically understood as the vector for the disease, anthrax can also be acquired through insect bites 3.
The forms of anthrax are distinguished by the suspected acquisition route.
Intestinal anthrax is ingested with the meat of infected animals, cutaneous anthrax is acquired through contact with infected animals or animal products such as hides, and injected anthrax is due to injected contaminated IV drugs.
Inhalational anthrax is associated with pleural effusions and mediastinal widening 4-6.
There are a few reports in the literature of the imaging findings of anthrax-related meningoencephalitis 7, and it is generally described as a disease with multiple hemorrhagic lesions.

Anti jo 1 antibody positive interstitial lung disease refer to cases of interstitial lung disease occuring in the setting on anti Jo 1 antibody positivity.
Anti jo 1 antibody positivity has a recognized association with interstitial lung disease.
This most commonly occurs in a setting of polymyositis or dermatomyositis but can also occur in other situations such as antisynthetase syndrome etc.

Anti-MDA5 antibody-positive amyopathic dermatomyositis is a subtype of dermatomyositis where there is positivity to an anti-melanoma differentiation-associated gene 5 (MDA5) antibody.
It has been reported to be associated with rapidly progressive interstitial lung disease (RP-ILD) resulting in high mortality.
On thoracic imaging, patient's may show rapidly progressive interstitial changes (sometimes associated with pneumomediastinum +/- pneumothoraces) and have respiratory failure.

Anti-GQ1b IgG antibody syndrome refers to a number of conditions which share autoantibodies to the ganglioside complex GQ1b, and have overlapping clinical spectrums.
The conditions believed to represent various clinical manifestations of a common immunological disorder include 1: acute ophthalmoparesis without ataxiaBickerstaff brainstem encephalitisGuillain-Barré syndromeMiller Fisher syndromeThe exact relationship between these entities, and what determines the clinical phenotype remains unclear, possibly relating to the exact specificity of the anti-GQ1b antibodies and how these are expressed throughout the nervous system 2.

Anti-MOG associated encephalomyelitis represents a group of inflammatory demyelinating disorders united by the presence of IgG antibodies to myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) that overlap with acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM), neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD) and multiple sclerosis (MS).
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesResearch in anti-MOG related diseases is rapidly evolving with new terminology being frequently proposed, including MOG-IgG-associated Optic Neuritis, Encephalitis, and Myelitis (MONEM), MOG antibody-associated diseases, anti-MOG encephalitis and other variations on this theme 1-4.
Anti-MOG encephalomyelitis is primarily encountered in children and young adults 1.Clinical presentation is that of other acquired demyelinating conditions and varies from individual to individual.
Not all presentations are equally prevalent, however: optic neuritis (most common 41-63%), longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesions (30%), neuromyelitis optica (6-24%) and encephalomyelitis (2-6%) 2.
Additionally, it appears that in approximately half of cases there is viral prodrome 2.
No specific presentation distinguishes individuals with anti-MOG antibodies from those presenting with similar clinical manifestation but without the antibodies.
There are no specific imaging features of anti-MOG associated diseases and as such, these are discussed as part of the overall clinical manifestation.
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis (ADEM) longitudinally extensive spinal cord lesionsmultiple sclerosis (MS)neuromyelitis optica spectrum disorder (NMOSD)optic neuritistransverse myelitisAlthough treatment and prognosis remain to be fully understood, it appears that generally, individuals with anti-MOG antibodies have fewer relapses and less severe clinical course than individuals with anti-aquaporin 4 antibodies presenting with NMOSD 2.Acute management with intravenous methylprednisolone, plasma exchange, intravenous immunoglobulin and cyclophosphamide have been reported and appear to be efficacious 2.
It remains unclear what, if any, long-term medications are required in individuals with a relapsing time course, although it seems that response to immunotherapeutic agents is different to multiple sclerosis and that some agents efficacious in the latter may actually worsen anti-MOG related diseases  2.

Anti N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor encephalitis is an autoimmune encephalitis with antibodies against the NMDA receptors.
It is sometimes considered a form of autoimmune limbic encephalitis.
It usually affects young patients particularly young females, in about 60% of whom ovarian teratoma is present.
Patients present with psychiatric symptoms but eventually develop seizures or movement abnormalities.
EpidemiologyClinical presentation Pathology Radiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisMediaReferencesYoung patients are most commonly affected with a female to male ratio of 4:1 1,3.
In young females, in particular, up to 58% are associated with ovarian teratoma 3.An initial viral-like prodromic phase often occurs, followed by prominent psychiatric symptoms ranging from anxiety to psychosis.
Subsequently, signs of temporal lobe dysfunction can occur such as seizures and amnesia.
With time, severe neurological deficits can develop such as abnormal movements, dysautonomia, catatonia, and coma 8.An interesting feature in those patients who survived is an amnesia to the entire illness.
This is thought to be due to disruption of synaptic plasticity which is important in the memory and learning process.
Anti N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor encephalitis is an autoimmune encephalitis due to antibodies against NR1–NR2 heteromers of the NMDA receptor, in particular, extracellular N-terminal domain of the NR1 subunit.
These antibodies result in marked reduction of cell-surface NMDA receptors and NMDA-receptor clusters in postsynaptic dendrites 1.
An underlying tumor is only detected in approximately 60% of patients, mostly teratomas.
Anti-NMDA NR2 antibodies are also found in approximately 15-35% patients with SLE and approximately 80% of SLE patients with severe neuropsychiatric illness.
CSF shows pleomorphism.
Serum titers of anti-NMDA antibodies are elevated and correlate well with the severity of the disease.
Imaging findings are highly variable and perhaps dependent upon the underlying cause of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis.
Namely, features might differ in pediatric versus adult patients and also depending on if the encephalitis is associated with a paraneoplastic or nonparaneoplastic cause.
Of note, initial MRI can be normal in up to 89% of patients 8.
FDG PET-CT might be more sensitive in detecting subtle abnormalities.
Findings are non-specific.
Abnormal FLAIR or T2 hyperintensity can be seen in the medial temporal lobe, cerebral/cerebellar cortex, basal ganglia, and brainstem 1,2.
Typically there is no abnormal enhancement or hemorrhage 8.FDG-PET may show either hyper- or hypo-metabolism in the affected region depending on time of presentation and severity of neurological deficits.
Patterns of involvement are variable, but can affect the cortex in any lobe, namely the temporal region 3.
Anomalies may be either symmetrical or asymmetrical.
Recently, hypo-metabolism in the medial occipital lobes has been described as a specific biomarker useful in differentiating anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis from other forms of autoimmune encephalitis.
Medical therapy is usually a combination of immunotherapies including corticosteroids, intravenous immunoglobulins, and/or plasma exchange 1.
Further workup of anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis is necessary with whole body CT and pelvic US for detection of associated tumor / ovarian dermoid 1.
Surgical excision of any ovarian dermoid is performed with concurrent commencement of immunotherapy.
Estimated 4% reported mortality for anti-NMDA receptor encephalitis mainly from respiratory or cardiac complication during intensive care stay 1.
Early diagnosis and treatment have been shown to improve outcome and reduce the number of relapses markedly.
An autobiography titled "Brain on Fire: My Month of Madness" by Susannah Cahalan describes her personal experience with the disease 4.

Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody-associated vasculitides refer to a group of heterogeneous autoimmune diseases characterized by necrotizing vasculitides and positive anti-neutrophil antibody titers.
They are reactive to either proteinase-3 (PR3-ANCA) - cANCA or myeloperoxidase (MPO-ANCA) - pANCA.
These vasculitides affect arterioles, capillaries, and venules which can involve virtually any organ with varying degrees of severity.
As a general rule, the lungs and kidneys are the most commonly involved.
The conditions that fall into this group are:granulomatosis with polyangiitispositive to cANCA in about 90% of casesgranulomatousmicroscopic polyangiitispositive to pANCA in about 50-90% of casesnon-granulomatousidiopathic pauci-immune pulmonary capillaritissometimes classified as a subset of microscopic polyangiitismay or may not be positive to pANCAnon-granulomatousidiopathic pauci-immune rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis (RPGN)sometimes classified as a subset of microscopic polyangiitismay or may not be positive to pANCAnon-granulomatouseosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitispositive to pANCA in about 35-75% of casesgranulomatouspositive to cANCA in about 90% of casesgranulomatouspositive to pANCA in about 50-90% of casesnon-granulomatoussometimes classified as a subset of microscopic polyangiitismay or may not be positive to pANCAnon-granulomatoussometimes classified as a subset of microscopic polyangiitismay or may not be positive to pANCAnon-granulomatouspositive to pANCA in about 35-75% of casesgranulomatouspulmonary vasculitides

Anti-synthetase syndrome (ASS) is a systemic, inflammatory, autoimmune disease that is characterized by inflammatory myositis, polyarthritis associated with interstitial lung disease (ILD) and anti-synthetase autoantibodies.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresASS can result from autoantibodies to eight of the aminoacyl-transfer RNA synthetases.
These include:anti-JO-1: most common anti-synthetase autoantibodyanti PL12anti PL7 - anti-threonyl-tRNA synthetaseanti OJanti EJanti KSanti ZOanti YRS/tyrImaging findings vary depending on the organ involved.
The associated interstitial lung disease may usually give either a NSIP pattern, an (OP) organizing pneumonia pattern or a combination (NSIP-OP pattern) 6.
A UIP pattern may also occasionally occur 8.
The consolidative regions may decrease or resolve in many cases although the disease can at times progress to fibrosis in more than one third of patients.
Some medications used include 9: Corticosteroids, Azathioprine, Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), calcineurin inhibitors: Tacrolimus and Cyclosporine, Rituximab, Cyclophosphamide and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).

Implanted antibiotic beads are a form of microbiological treatment inserted during orthopedic procedures to aid with the treatment of chronic infection.
They are also used as a local treatment for osteomyelitis.
The beads are radiopaque, thus lending themselves to visualization on all imaging modalities.

Antibiotic-associated diarrhea can be broadly divided into two groups:The former is a life-threatening condition, requiring prompt diagnosis and treatment whereas the later is milder and self-limiting.
Both result from changes in the bowel flora following administration of typically broad spectrum antibiotics.

Antimuscarinics decrease bowel movements in pelvic MRI, and may be used for better image acquisition.
Usually, 20mg of hyoscine butylbromide IM/IV is administered prior to examination.
Myasthenia gravisPyloric stenosisBenign prostatic hyperplasiaParalytic ileusAdditionally, precautions mention:Down syndromeUlcerative colitisHypertensionTachycardiaOpen angle glaucomaPregnancy

Pulmonary involvement in antiphospholipid syndrome is one of the most frequent arterial complications of antiphospholipid syndrome.
It is essentially related to pulmonary arterial microthrombosis and may cause a wide spectrum of conditions, which include 3-5:pulmonary thromboembolic diseasepulmonary hypertensionacute respiratory distress syndromeprimary thrombosis of large lung vesselsmicrovascular pulmonary thrombosis 7diffuse alveolar hemorrhagefibrosing alveolitispostpartum lung syndromepulmonary capillaritis

Antiphospholipid syndrome is a systemic autoimmune disorder.
It is usually defined as the clinical complex of vascular occlusion and ischemic events occurring in patients who have circulating antiphospholipid antibodies.
Clinical presentationPathologyTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresAntiphospholipid syndrome is characterized by venous, arterial, or small vessel thrombosis, potentially affecting multiple organ systems:abdominal manifestations (e.g. renal vein thrombosis, Budd-Chiari syndrome, mesenteric ischemia)cerebral manifestations (e.g. ischemic stroke, transient ischemic attack)if present with livedo reticularis, is sometimes known as Sneddon syndromecutaneous manifestations (e.g. livedo reticularis, livedo racemosa)thoracic manifestationspulmonary manifestations (e.g. pulmonary embolus, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage)cardiac manifestations (e.g. valvular thickening)if present with livedo reticularis, is sometimes known as Sneddon syndromepulmonary manifestations (e.g. pulmonary embolus, diffuse alveolar hemorrhage)cardiac manifestations (e.g. valvular thickening)Patients have circulating antiphospholipid antibodies cross-react with cell membrane phospholipids.
This results in a hypercoagulable state leading to vascular thrombosis.
The disorder can be primary (primary antiphospholipid syndrome) or secondary (i.e. associated with systemic lupus erythematosus).Positive lupus anticoagulant, anticardiolipin antibodies, and anti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodies are seen but are not specific for antiphospholipid syndrome if considered in isolation (see diagnostic criteria below) 6.
Paradoxically, if lupus anticoagulant is present, a patient's coagulation profile will show an elevated aPTT suggesting a propensity to bleeding, however this is not the case.
Diagnosis is made using the revised Sapporo criteria, in which patients need to meet at least one clinical and at least one laboratory criteria to fulfill the diagnosis of antiphospholipid syndrome 7.clinical criteria 7:vascular thrombosis: ≥1 episode of venous, arterial, or small vessel thrombosis in any tissue or organsuperficial thrombophlebitis does not meet this criterionpregnancy morbidity: 3 miscarriages <10 weeks, or 1 miscarriage ≥10 weeks, or premature birth before 34 weekslaboratory criteria (detected on ≥2 occasions on testing at least 12 weeks apart) 7:anticoardiolipin antibodiesanti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodieslupus anticoagulantvascular thrombosis: ≥1 episode of venous, arterial, or small vessel thrombosis in any tissue or organsuperficial thrombophlebitis does not meet this criterionpregnancy morbidity: 3 miscarriages <10 weeks, or 1 miscarriage ≥10 weeks, or premature birth before 34 weekssuperficial thrombophlebitis does not meet this criterionanticoardiolipin antibodiesanti-beta2-glycoprotein I antibodieslupus anticoagulantAsymptomatic antiphospholipid syndrome does not warrant any antiplatelet or antithrombotic therapy 8.
However, warfarin is used for acute thromboembolic events or as secondary prevention 8.
Management of organ-specific manifestations of antiphospholipid syndrome are beyond the scope of this general article.
Less than 1% of patients may develop the more serious and fatal catastrophic antiphospholipid syndrome.

Antithrombin (AT) III deficiency (now simply called antithrombin deficiency) refers to a congenital lack of the endogenous anticoagulant antithrombin.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesAntithrombin deficiency is considered the least common of the three main anticoagulant deficiencies (the other two being protein C deficiency and protein S deficiency).
Its incidence is thought to be ~1:2000-5000 1.Antithrombin is a vitamin K-independent glycoprotein in the coagulation pathway.
It is a major inhibitor of thrombin and other coagulation serine proteases, including factors Xa and IXa.
The deficiency of antithrombin leads to a procoagulant state which is associated with an increased risk of thrombotic and embolic situations such as:pulmonary embolismdeep venous thrombosisacute superior mesenteric vein thrombosisRadiology mainly plays a role in identifying thrombotic and embolic complications (see above).
It is useful for the radiologist to be aware of the thrombotic risk associated with this deficiency.
Some publications favor the introduction of long-term oral anticoagulation treatment after the first thrombotic event 4.

The antler sign is an uncommon sign of lung torsion on CT where branches from the main pulmonary artery all arise from a single side, indicating twisting of the lobe or lung.
In the normal lung, the main pulmonary arteries are straight and lobar and segmental branches arise from it on both sides.
This is not to be confused with the stag's antler sign referring to upper lobe pulmonary venous diversion (cephalisation) in pulmonary venous hypertension or pulmonary edema as seen on frontal chest radiograph.

Antley-Bixler syndrome (ABS), also known as trapezoidocephaly-synostosis syndrome, is a rare autosomal dominant or recessive condition characterized by craniosynostosis and extra-cranial synostoses.
Mid-facial hypoplasia is also common.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyReferencesIt is a very rare condition with only 50 cases described in the global literature up to 2006 3.
craniosynostosis limb synostoses e.g. radioulnar, radiohumeralmid-face hypoplasia - commonly associated with airway obstructioncongenital heart diseaserenal maldevelopment e.g. agenesisPOR mutation only: congenital adrenal hyperplasia and ambiguous genitalia Mutations in two separate genes FGFR2 and POR have been found to produce the Antley-Bixler syndrome phenotype.
FGFR2 is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner and POR is in an autosomal recessive manner.
Neonatal mortality is up to 80%, with usual cause of death respiratory compromise.
However as the child ages, prognosis improves.
First case was described by R Antley and D Bixler in 1975 3.

Antoine H Becquerel (1852-1908) was a French scientist renowned for his work and subsequent discovery into the evidence of radioactivity for which he was awarded a Nobel Prize.
Early lifeResearch into phosphorescenceLater lifeLegacyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAntoine Henri Becquerel was born on the 15th December 1852 in Paris, France to a family of nobility and active scientific history.
He received his scientific education at the Ecole Polytechnique completing it in 1874.
By 1895 he sat as the Chairman of Physics at the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, a title previously held by his father 1.Becquerel's initial research explored natural phosphorescence of materials exposed to visible light.
He would wrap a photodetector in black paper and phosphorescent materials in an attempt to create a pattern (figure 2), proposing that these materials would emit x-ray-like radiation when they are exposed to sunlight.
Becquerel conducted these experiments in both full sun days and cloudy days, expecting a difference in pattern; however, he found the patterns on the photodetector to be similar.
Upon further experimentation, involving uranium salts, Becquerel concluded that these materials were emitting energy without any extrinsic excitation based on the lack of variability in the photodetector pattern relative to the experimental conditions (light, no light).This serendipitous discovery saw Becquerel work alongside Marie Skłodowska-Curie for many years into the theory of radioactivity, eventually sharing a Nobel Prize for Physics for his discovery of radioactivity.
Antoine was first married in 1874 to Lucie Zoé Marie Jamin, whom passed away after giving birth to his first son, Jean Becquerel.
He later married again to Louise Désirée Lorieux in 1890.
Antoine Henri Becquerel died on the 25th August in 1908 in Le Croisic, Brittany, France.
Rumford medal, 1900Nobel Prize in Physics, 1903Barnard medal, 1905discovered radioactivitythe SI unit for radioactivity, the becquerel, was named in his honor.

Antonio Egas Moniz (1874-1955) 1 was a pioneering Portuguese neurologist that is notable in radiology history for his development of cerebral angiography in 1927.He is also known as the developer of prefrontal leucotomy (now better known as a lobotomy) ​for which he received a Nobel Prize in 1949 (shared with Swiss physiologist Walter Rudolf Hess (1881-1973) 1 for his work on the neurophysiology of the diencephalon and its role in the autonomic control of the organs).Early lifeDevelopment of cerebral angiographyLater lifeLegacyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresHe was born on 19th November 1874 in Avanca on the Northern coast of Portugal, on his family's ancestral estates.
He was christened Antonio Caetano de Abreu Freire.
When he was older his godfather, gave him the name Egas Moniz, after a renowned Portuguese patrician, who had once tutored the King of Portugal 2.He studied medicine at the University of Coimbra, the oldest university in Portugal.
He later went to France for postgraduate training in neurology and psychiatry.
He returned home in 1911 to head the new department of neurology at the University of Lisbon.
He stayed there until until his retirement in 1944.
In 1926 he started his experiments on cerebral angiography and presented the results at a conference in Paris in 1927.
He was the first person to visualize the vessels of the brain using injected contrast media, key to the development of cerebral angiography.
His initial choices of contrast media, lithium and strontium bromide, were both found to be unsuitable due to toxicity, which resulted in the death of a patient.
His first successful cerebral angiography was with a 25% solution of sodium iodide as his contrast agent.
He was aided in his research by Pedro Almeida Lima (1903-1985), the founder of Portuguese neurosurgery 2,4.He published two books on cerebral angiography in 1938 and 1940.Moniz was a brilliant polymath with interests ranging from mathematics, history, music, painting and writing, to politics.
He was a writer, speaker, and had a distinguished political career beyond medicine, serving as an MP from 1900 and as Portugal's ambassador to Spain.
He retired from politics at age 51 (in 1925) in order to more fully pursue research in neurology 2.
Other than cerebral angiography, his main research interests were in Parkinson disease, battle trauma neurology, and clinical neurology.
He died on December 13th 1955, at the age of 81, from a catastrophic abdominal hemorrhage.pioneering work on cerebral angiographyEgas Moniz Museum and art collectionnumerous books including autobiographical writingspolitical contributions

Antopol-Goldman lesions are very rare presentations of subepithelial hemorrhage in the renal pelvis, presenting as discrete mass-like hematomas.
PathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosisReferencesThe cause of these lesions is uncertain, although long-term anticoagulation, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) overuse, trauma, and amyloidosis have been implicated.
Non-specific mass-like lesion in the renal pelvis, with an attenuation greater than water (>10 HU).
It does not enhance after administration of IV contrast.
The problem with Antopol-Goldman lesions is that their discrete appearance is likely to be confused with a renal neoplasm.
Unfortunately, they are almost always diagnosed after nephrectomy.

Antral follicle count (AFC) or basal antral follicle count is a test performed to check a female individual's ovarian reserve.
PrincipleProcedureAnalysisSee alsoReferencesA female is born with a lifetime supply of eggs and as she enters puberty these eggs develop.
During and after puberty these follicles develop and are released on a monthly basis.
An antral follicle is a resting follicle and appears as a small fluid-filled sac which contains an immature egg.
These follicles can be measured and counted on cycle days 2, 3 and 5.
The antral follicles vary every month.
Antral follicle count is rightly done on day 3 of the cycle by a Trans vaginal ultrasound.
Initially the ovarian volume of both the ovaries is calculated.
Further the number of small antral follicles in both the ovaries is measured.
These follicles could vary in size from 2-10 mm.
What is considered a normal AFC varies between institutions.
It is roughly considered to be about 3-8 per ovary.
The AFC count is a major predictor of the ovarian reserve and could reflect the size of the remaining primordial follicle pool.
Low fertility is characterized by low numbers of oocytes and are usually associated with high follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) levels.
It is considered to be more accurate than the basal FSH testing for older women >44 years of age when predicting IVF outcome.
When an average to high number of antral follicles (eight or more) are visible on the ultrasound, fertility specialists expect to be able to retrieve an adequate number of eggs and the pregnancy rates are higher than average.
If few antral follicles are evident, a poorer response is expected and the IVF cycle could be canceled to attempt better counts the following month.follicular monitoring

The antral nipple sign refers to redundant pyloric mucosa protruding into the gastric antrum and is seen in hypertrophic pyloric stenosis on ultrasound examination.cervix sign of pyloric stenosistarget sign of pyloric stenosis

The antral pad sign is a feature seen on a spot radiograph of the upper gastrointestinal tract obtained with orally-administered contrast material.
It refers to the extrinsic impression or indentation on the posteroinferior aspect of the antrum.
The impression is generally arcuate and smooth, and it may or may not be associated with an impression on the medial aspect of the duodenum.
Differentials to be considered when the antral pad sign is seen include:pancreatic carcinoma head / bodypancreatitispancreatic pseudocystnormal distended gallbladder with the patient in a right anterior oblique position

Antrochoanal polyps (ACP) are solitary sinonasal polyps that arise within the maxillary sinus.
They pass to the nasopharynx through the sinus ostium and posterior nasal cavity, enlarging the latter two.
Similar, less common, polyps can arise in the sphenoid sinus extending into the nasopharynx: these are termed sphenochoanal polyps.
Likewise, there are nasochoanal, frontochoanal, and ethmochoanal polyps 9.EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAntrochoanal polyps represent only ~5% of sinonasal polyps 3.
They are most commonly seen in young adults in their 3rd to 5th decades.
They are slightly more common in males than females 3.Clinical presentation is usually with an obstructed nasal passage and/or sinus symptoms.
Occasionally, larger masses may prolapse posteriorly enough that they may be visible through the mouth as they hang down from the nasopharynx 5.Unlike other sinonasal polyps, antrochoanal polyps are usually found in non-atopic patients 3.The exact etiology is not known, but it is thought that infection may be a common causative association.
Chronic sinusitis is present in ~25% of patients 7 but a causal relationship has not been firmly established.
Pathologically, antrochoanal polyps are identical to other inflammatory polyps.
However, unlike other polyps, they usually have a narrow stalk arising from the maxillary sinus 5,7.Histologically, the polyp is lined by respiratory epithelium with increased inflammatory infiltrate.
Due to the narrow pedicle, vascular compromise with secondary change may be seen.
This may result in hemorrhage, organizing hematoma, neovascular changes, and/or papillary endothelial hyperplasia 5,7.Plain films are no longer considered adequate in the assessment of sinus pathology.
However, they continue to be performed in some cases.
Findings include 3:unilateral opacification of the maxillary sinusnasopharyngeal mass is occasionally seenfrequently, bilateral sinus involvement (23-42%) 3CT is the preferred method for diagnosis due to the exquisite bony detail of the paranasal sinus anatomy.
In general, a non-contrast scan is sufficient.
Typically, antrochoanal polyps have the following features:defined mass with mucin density is seen arising from the maxillary sinuswidening of the maxillary ostium and extending into the nasopharynxno associated bony destruction but rather smooth enlargement of the sinusThese features are best appreciated on true coronal or coronal reformatted scans.
Although pathologically antrochoanal polyps have a narrow pedicle or stalk, this is usually not evident on CT.Occasionally, antrochoanal polyps may have a higher density (and Hounsfield values) if they are long-standing (i.e. desiccated) and/or have an associated fungal infection (see fungal sinusitis) 1.
A contrast-enhanced scan is not necessary but may demonstrate peripheral enhancement.
T1: intermediate to low signalT2high homogeneous T2 signalsignal may vary if they are chronic and/or if fungal infection is presentT1 C+ (Gd): peripheral enhancement is seen on post-contrast imageshigh homogeneous T2 signalsignal may vary if they are chronic and/or if fungal infection is presentClassic treatment is intranasal snare polypectomy.
However, if the base of the stalk is not excised, the polyp may recur.
Ideally, minimally invasive endoscopic surgery is performed: the attachment site of the stalk is identified and excised along with a small cuff of adjacent mucosa.
Visualization of the stalk base can be achieved in many cases via a medial meatotomy, or may require the creation of an additional window through the inferior meatus 6.Recurrence rate is low (~7%) if the stalk base is excised 6.They were first described by Killian in 1906.
Killian expressed the opinion that they arose from the maxillary sinus and gained access to the nasal cavity through the accessory ostium, based on a detailed study of 22 cases 8.General imaging differential considerations include:hypertrophied turbinateinverted papillomaesthesioneuroblastomajuvenile nasopharyngeal angiofibroma (JNA)nasoethmoidal encephalocelemaxillary sinus mucoceleacute sinusitis with edematous mucosa prolapsing from maxillary antrum 2sinonasal organized hematoma 4

An antrolith is a calcified mass within the maxillary sinus.
The origin of the nidus of calcification may be extrinsic (foreign body in sinus) or intrinsic (stagnant mucus, fungal ball).Most antroliths are small and asymptomatic.
Larger ones may present as a chronic maxillary sinusitis with symptoms like pain and discharge.
They appear as solitary or multiple, faintly to extremely radiopaque masses embedded within the mucoperiosteum.
The sinus wall is intact.
Small antroliths require no treatment.
However, larger or symptomatic masses need to be are surgically removed.

The AO classification of distal clavicular fractures along with the Neer classification system is one of the more frequently used classification systems when assessing distal clavicular fractures.
The classification system, broken into three categories focuses on the displacement and pattern of the fracture and the integrity of the coracoclavicular ligaments.
A1 when the fracture is extra-articular.
A2 when the fracture is intra-articular non-operative treatmentfracture is nondisplacedthe coracoclavicular ligament is intact B1 when the fracture is extra-articular.
B2 when the fracture is comminutednon-operative or operative treatment can be recommended fracture is displacedthe coracoclavicular ligament is intact C1 when the fracture is extra-articular.
C2 when the fracture is intra-articularoperative treatment is be recommended fracture is displacedcoracoclavicular ligament is torn Neer classification of distal clavicle fractures

The AO classification of proximal humeral fractures, along with the Neer classification, is one of the most frequently used systems for classifying proximal humeral fractures.
The AO classification divides proximal humeral fractures into three groups, A, B and C, each with subgroups, and places more emphasis on the blood supply to the articular surface 1,2.
The assumption is that if either the lesser or greater tuberosity remains attached to the articular segment, then blood supply is probably adequate to avoid avascular necrosis 2.
type A: extra-articular unifocal (either tuberosity +/- surgical neck of the humerus) A1: extra-articular unifocal fracture A2: extra-articular unifocal fracture with impacted metaphyseal fractureA3: extra-articular unifocal fracture with non-impacted metaphyseal fracturetype B: extra-articular bifocal (both tuberosities +/- surgical neck of the humerus or glenohumeral dislocation)  B1: extra-articular bifocal fractures with impacted metaphyseal fractureB2: extra-articular bifocal fractures with non-impacted metaphyseal fractureB3: extra-articular bifocal fractures with glenohumeral joint dislocationtype C: extra-articular (anatomical neck) but with compromise to the vascular supply of the articular segmentC1: anatomical neck fracture, minimally displacedC2: anatomical neck fracture, displaced and impactedC3: anatomical neck fracture with glenohumeral joint dislocationA1: extra-articular unifocal fracture A2: extra-articular unifocal fracture with impacted metaphyseal fractureA3: extra-articular unifocal fracture with non-impacted metaphyseal fractureB1: extra-articular bifocal fractures with impacted metaphyseal fractureB2: extra-articular bifocal fractures with non-impacted metaphyseal fractureB3: extra-articular bifocal fractures with glenohumeral joint dislocationC1: anatomical neck fracture, minimally displacedC2: anatomical neck fracture, displaced and impactedC3: anatomical neck fracture with glenohumeral joint dislocationThe risk of avascular necrosis increases from type A (very low) to type C (high risk) and thus determines treatment (see proximal humeral fractures) 2.As is the case with the Neer classification, due to the combination of complex anatomy and complex classification system, inter-observer and even intra-observer reproducibility is poor 1.

The AO classification of subaxial injuries aims to simplify and universalise the classification of subaxial cervical spine fractures and improve interobserver and intraobserver reliability.
UsageClassificationRelated topicsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAlthough its existence is widely known among the relevant subspecialty groups, its day-to-day use varies greatly from institution to institution and it is not safe to assume that clinicians reading a report are familiar with it.
The terminology/descriptive terms used in the classification are, however, widely known.
Additionally, these classification capture important high-level grouping of injuries and it is, therefore, worth being familiar with them.
The AO subaxial cervical spine injury classification aims to categorize injuries into 9 main groups (A0-A4, B1-B3, and C) based on the morphology of the injury.
Additional features such as facet joint injury, neurologic status and case-specific modifiers are also captured.
First, injuries are categorized into three groups based on the main morphological feature: A: compression fracture of the vertebrae, without tension band (ligamentous) injuryB: disruption of anterior or posterior tension bandC: displaced fracture, with translocation of one vertebral body relative to another in any directionType A injuries involve compression of the anterior structures or fractures of the spinal process that are mechanically insignificantA0: no injury or an isolated injury such as a lamina or spinous process fractureA1: compression fracture that only involves one endplate, but does not involve the vertebral body posterior wallA2: split fracture that is oriented either coronal or pincer that includes both endplates, but does not involve the posterior wallA3: incomplete burst fracture that only involves one endplate, any involvement of the posterior vertebral wall results in retropulsion of fragmentsA4: complete burst fracture that involves both endplatesType B injuries affect the tension bands anterior or posterior to the cervical spine.
It should be noted that any type B injuries that also have translation are automatically type C injuries.
The anterior tension band includes the anterior longitudinal ligament, while the posterior tension band refers to a combination of osseous and ligamentous structures, including the supraspinous ligaments, interspinous ligaments, articular facet capsules, and ligamenta flava, collectively also known as the posterior ligamentous complex.
B1: posterior tension band injury (bony) with physical separation between fractured bony structures, anterior structures may also be includedB2: posterior tension band injury (bony, capsuloligamentous, ligamentous) with complete separation of the capsuloligamentous or bony capsuloligamentous structures of the posterior aspect.
Again this can include anterior structuresB3: anterior tension band injury with physical separation between anterior structures with a persistent connection (tethering) of posterior structuresType C injuries are translational injuries with displacement/translation in any direction from one vertebral body relative to another.
Specific additional injuries (either type A or facet) should be categorized as a subtype, e.g. ‘type C, subtype A2’.
Type F injuries are to describe a range of facet joint injuries.
In the context of multiple ipsilateral facet injuries, the highest class is used for classification.
The "bilateral" modifier is used if both facets on the same level have the same level of injury.
If the injury category on either side is different, the right side is described first.
F1: non-displaced facet fracture (fragment size <1 cm; <40% lateral mass involvement)F2: facet fracture that can become unstable (fragment size >1 cm; >40% lateral mass involvement or displacement)F3: floating lateral mass due to disruption of pedicle and laminaF4: subluxation that is pathologic or perched/dislocated facetNX: undeterminedN0: neurological intactN1: transient neurological injury: resolved on presentation or <24 hours after injuryN2: radiculopathyN3: incomplete spinal cord injuryN4: complete spinal cord injuryM1: posterior capsuloligamentous injury without associated complete disruption, from a bony perspective the injury may seem stable, however, often seen on MRI the posterior ligaments are damagedM2: critical disk herniation where the nucleus pulposus will be seen protruding posterior to a vertical line along the posterior border of the lowest injured vertebraM3: stiffening/metabolic bone disease, e.g. ankylosing spondylitis, diffuse idiopathic skeletal hyperostosis (DISH)M4: signs of vertebral artery injuryAO spine classification systemsAO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification systemAO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification system

The AO classification of sacral injuries aims to simplify and universalise the process of classifying sacral injuries and improve interobserver and intraobserver reliability.
The AO sacral classification is broken into three subsections that follow a hierarchical structure similar to the AO classifications of the thoracolumbar spine.
Injury types (A, B or C)Neurological signs (N)Modifiers (M)Related topicsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresInjuries are broadly categorized into three groups based on the region of injury: A: lower sacrococcygeal injuriesB: posterior pelvic injuriesC: spinopelvic injuriesType A injuries involve the lower portion of the sacrococcygeal region.
The stability of both the pelvis and the spinopelvic region are unaffected by type A injuries, however higher A-type injuries can have associated neurological impact.
A1: injury to the coccygeal region or compression injuries including that of ligamentous avulsion fracturesA2: fractures below the level of the sacroiliac joint that are non-displaced and transverse in orientationA3: fractures below the level of the sacroiliac joint that are displaced and transverse in orientationType B injuries are categorized as fractures of the sacrum which are unilateral and longitudinal in orientation whereby the ipsilateral superior S1 facet is no longer discontinuous with the medial aspect of the sacrum.
Unlike type A, type B injuries have an impact on the stability of the pelvis, however a minimal impact on the spinopelvic region.
B1: a fracture that is longitudinal in orientation, medial to the foramen and involves the spinal canalB2: a fracture that is longitudinal in orientation, lateral to the foramen and does not involve the spinal canal nor the foramenB3: a fracture that is longitudinal in orientation involving the foramen but not the spinal canalType C injuries always result in instability of the spinopelvic region C0: nondisplaced sacral U-type variant fractureC1: a sacral U-type variant without any posterior pelvic instabilityC2: bilateral complete B-type fracture without transverse componentC3: displaced sacral U-type variant fractureNx: the patient cannot be examinedN0: no neurological deficitsN1: transient neurological injuryN2: nerve root injuryN3: cauda equina syndrome/incomplete spinal cord injuryN4: complete spinal cord injuryM1: soft tissue injuryM2: metabolic bone diseaseM3: anterior pelvic ring injuryM4: sacroiliac joint injuryAO spine classification systemsAO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification systemAO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification system

The AO classification of upper cervical injuries aims to simplify and universalise the process of classifying upper cervical injuries and improve interobserver and intraobserver reliability.
UsageClassificationRelated topicsRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAlthough in routine clinical practice, at least in many institutions, injuries will be described using more 'traditional' terminology (e.g. hangman's fracture of C2, type II dens fracture, etc...) rather than by specifying exact AO nomenclature, these classifications highlight important unifying principles and use increasingly universal terminology.
As such, familiarity with them is worthwhile.
Injuries are broadly divided into three types based on location-specific patterns and then further subdivided according to injury type and presence of neurological signs and/or modifying factors.
type 1: occipital condyle and occipital cervical joint complex injuriestype 2: C1 ring and C1-2 joint complex injuriestype 3: C2 and C2-3 joint complex injuriesA: bony injury only - considered stable injuriesB: tension band injuries - considered potentially unstable injuriesC: translation injuries - considered unstable injuriesNX: the patient cannot be examinedN0: no neurological deficitsN1: transient neurological injuryN2: nerve root injuryN3: incomplete spinal cord injuryN4: complete spinal cord injury+: continued spinal cord compressionM1: injury at high risk of non-union with nonoperative treatmentM2: injury with significant potential for instabilityM3: patient-specific factors affecting treatment (e.g. ankylosing spondylitis)M4: vascular injury or abnormality affecting treatment AO spine classification systemsAO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification systemAO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification system

The AO spine classification of thoracolumbar injuries is one of the more commonly used thoracolumbar spinal fracture classification systems and aims to simplify and universalise the process of classifying spinal injuries and improve interobserver and intraobserver reliability 3.Unlike the other widely used system, the thoracolumbar injury classification and severity score (TLICS) 1, the AO spine classification system does not aim to determine treatment.
UsageClassification systemRelated articlesRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAlthough its existence is widely known among the relevant subspecialty groups, its day-to-day use varies greatly from institution to institution and it is not safe to assume that clinicians reading a report are familiar with it.
It is therefore not wise to simply describe an injury as "B2".
The terminology/descriptive terms used in the classification are, however, widely used and also are an excellent systematic overview of how to think about and describe these injuries.
As such, familiarity with them is worthwhile.
The AO spine thoracolumbar classification system consists of only three classes of thoracolumbar injuries.
Three separate components to every fracture are considered, with only the first fully assessable on imaging alone 4.
Injuries are broadly categorized into three groups: A: compression injuriesB: distraction injuriesC: displacement or dislocationType A injuries involve the anterior portion of the vertebral column with an intact posterior tension band (the group of muscles, ligaments and processes/pedicles that maintain the integrity of the vertebral column).A0: no or clinically insignificant fractures of the spinous or transverse processesA1: also known as wedge compression injuries; they involve a single anterior or middle endplate of the vertebral body without the involvement of the posterior aspect of the posterior vertebral wallA2: also known as split or pincer type injuries; they involve both endplates without the involvement of the posterior wallA3: also known as incomplete burst injuries; they involve a single end plate along with the posterior vertebral wall; a vertebral laminar fracture is usually also presentA4: also known as complete burst injuries; they involve both end plates along with the posterior vertebral wall and are also often associated with a laminar fractureType B injuries involve the anterior or posterior tension band.
B1: also known as Chance fractures; they involve disruption of the posterior tension band with extension into the vertebral bodyB2: also known as posterior tension band disruption injuries; involvement of an intervertebral body level with disruption to the posterior +/- anterior tension bandB3: also known as hyperextension injuries; they involve injuries to the anterior tension band +/- intervertebral or interosseous injuryType C injuries involve displacement in any direction.
No subtypes are present as there are numerous possibilities of dislocating fractures.
N0: no focal neurological signs presentN1: a history of transient neurological signsN2: current symptoms of radiculopathyN3: an incomplete spinal cord or cauda equina injuryN4: complete spinal cord injury (complete absence of motor and sensory function) 2NX: cannot be assessedM1: the presence of ligamentous injury in the absence of vertebral body injury which can contribute to poor stabilityM2: the presence of co-morbid conditions such as ankylosing spondylitis, osteopenia, osteoporosis, overlying burns, etcAO spine classification systemsAO spine: upper cervical classification systemAO spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO spine: sacral classification systemAO spine: upper cervical classification systemAO spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO spine: sacral classification system

The AO Spine classification systems is a group of imaging morphology-based classification system, combined with clinical factors for injury of spinal trauma.
It is designed to be a simple and reproducible method of describing injury patterns.
At the time of writing (Oct 2018), the four published classification systems are:AO Spine: upper cervical classification systemAO Spine: subaxial cervical classification systemAO Spine: thoracolumbar classification systemAO Spine: sacral classification systemAlthough not all clinicians or radiologists will be familiar with the exact alphanumerical classification of each fracture within these systems, they use best practice terminology and are built upon and share features with many prior attempts at reaching an 'ideal' classification.
Also, they capture important high-level groupings of injuries.
As such, being familiar with the overall structure, key features, and terminology of these classification systems is worthwhile.
The AO Spine group is an 'international community of spine surgeons generating, distrib­uting, and exchanging knowledge to advance science and the spine care profession through research, education, and community development.
With this collaborative approach, AO Spine continues to advance spine care worldwide' 2.Illustrations and classifications have been reproduced with permission.

The aorta, the great artery, is the largest artery of the human body and carries oxygenated blood ejected from the left ventricle to the systemic circulation.
It is divided into:thoracic aortaascending aortaaortic archdescending aortaabdominal aortaascending aortaaortic archdescending aortaIt has branches from each section and gradually tapers down to its termination where it bifurcates into the common iliac arteries anterior to the L4 vertebral body.aortic anatomical variants

The broad term aortic aneurysm is usually reserved for pathology discussion.
More specific anatomic and radiologic discussion is based on the location of the aneurysm:thoracic aortic aneurysmabdominal aortic aneurysm

The aortic annulus is a fibrous ring at the aortic orifice to the front and right of the atrioventricular aortic valve and is considered the transition point between the left ventricle and aortic root.
The annulus is part of the fibrous skeleton of the heart.
It is at the level of the sinus of Valsalva and is the site of aortic valve leaflet insertion.the aortic annulus is a site of insertion of prosthetic heart valves

A useful mnemonic to remember the major branches of the aortic arch is:ABC'SA: arch of aortaB: brachiocephalic trunkC: left common carotid arteryS: left subclavian artery

An aortic arch view is one of the additional views performed on fetal obstetric ultrasound - fetal echocardiography.
It is an oblique sagittal view which is obtained similar to a left anterior oblique angiogram or the sagittal arch view obtained in CT arteriography.
The isthmus, after the origin of the left subclavian artery, is the narrowest part of the aortic arch.

The aortic arch represents the direct continuation of the ascending aorta and represents a key area for a review of normal variant anatomy and a wide range of pathological processes that range from congenital anomalies to traumatic injury.
SummaryGross anatomyVariant anatomySee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresorigin: continuation of the ascending aorta at the level of the sternomanubrial joint, in the plane of Ludwigcourse: an arch from right to left and front to back; lies anterior and to the left of the tracheamain branches: brachiocephalic trunk, left common carotid artery and left subclavian artery.supply: head, neck and upper limbstermination: adjacent to the lower border of T4 in the plane of Ludwig where it continues as the descending aortakey relationships: trachea, pulmonary trunk and arteriesThe aortic arch represents the continuation of the ascending aorta and is nominally defined as starting at the level of the transthoracic plane of Ludwig, a horizontal plane from the sternomanubrial angle to the T4 vertebral body.
The sternomanubrial joint is the same level as the second sternocostal articulation.
It courses in a narrow arch from ventral to dorsal and from right to left such that at the end of the arch it sits to the left of midline, adjacent to the thoracic vertebral column.
Its peak is at the T3/4 level.
Three main branches originate from the upward convexity of the arch in the majority (75%) of patients.
In order from proximal to distal the branches are:brachiocephalic trunk or artery (innominate artery) which goes on to divide into the right subclavian and right common carotid arteriesthe aortic arch can be divided by the brachiocephalic trunk into "proximal" and "distal" portions 3left common carotid arteryleft subclavian arteryjust beyond the last branch, the aortic isthmus represents a minor narrowing at the site of the ligamentum arteriosum, which runs between the undersurface of the aortic arch and the terminal pulmonary trunk, this ligament represents the obliterated foetal ductus arteriosus and due to this attachment, this represents the site of the majority of thoracic aortic injuries when the body undergoes significant decelerationthe aortic arch can be divided by the brachiocephalic trunk into "proximal" and "distal" portions 3just beyond the last branch, the aortic isthmus represents a minor narrowing at the site of the ligamentum arteriosum, which runs between the undersurface of the aortic arch and the terminal pulmonary trunk, this ligament represents the obliterated foetal ductus arteriosus and due to this attachment, this represents the site of the majority of thoracic aortic injuries when the body undergoes significant decelerationThe arch terminates at the lower border of T4 where it continues as the descending aorta, in the plane of Ludwig, a horizontal plane from the sternomanubrial angle to the T4 vertebral body.
The arch position may be altered:right sided aortic archdouble aortic archThere are three common variations to the branching pattern of the aortic arch:normal: seen in 75% of patientsbovine arch: a common origin of brachiocephalic and left common carotid artery - seen in approximately 15% of patients (more common in individuals of African descent)left common carotid has its origin from the brachiocephalic artery proper, rather than from a common trunk - seen in approximately 10% of patients (also more common in individuals of African descent)There may be additional branches that arise directly from the arch:thyroidea ima artery, usually between the brachiocephalic and left common carotidleft vertebral artery, usually between the left common carotid and the left subclavian arteriesrarely the right subclavian and right common carotid arise independentlySee: variant anatomy of the aortic arch.congenital aortic abnormalities

The use of the aortic dissection detection risk score plus d-dimer is a proposed standardized strategy of safely ruling out the diagnosis of an acute aortic syndrome.
Similar to how the pulmonary embolism rule-out criteria (PERC) negates the need for further workup of a pulmonary embolism.
The score utilizes the aortic dissection detection risk score (ADD-RS) and a d-dimer blood test:patients with an ADD-RS score >1 should proceed directly to imaging regardless of the d-dimer resultpatients with ADD-RS of 0 or 1 with a positive d-dimer (>500 ng/mL) should proceed to further imagingin patients with ADD-RS of 0 or 1 with a negative d-dimer (<500 ng/mL) the diagnosis of an acute aortic syndrome can be excludedThis strategy was found to miss approximately 1/300 cases of acute aortic syndromes but also may reduce the rates of imaging by up to a half.
The use of this algorithm has not been prospectively tested or widely implemented in clinical practice and care should be taken whilst using it.

The aortic dissection detection risk score (ADD-RS) is a clinical decision tool that aids in grading the pretest probability of an acute aortic dissection.
Scores range from 0-3, where 0 is classed as low risk, 1 is moderate risk and 2-3 is high risk 1.The three domains in which patients may score a point are:One point for any of the following to a maximum of 1:Marfan’s syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome, vascular Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Turner’s syndrome or other connective tissue diseasesother predisposing genetic mutations, e.g. FBN1, TGFBR1family history of aortic dissectionknown aortic valve diseaserecent aortic manipulationknown thoracic aortic aneurysmOne point for any of the following to a maximum of 1:pain in the chest, back or abdomen that issudden onsetsevere in intensityripping, tearing or sharp qualitysudden onsetsevere in intensityripping, tearing or sharp qualityOne point for any of the following to a maximum of 1:pulse deficitsystolic blood pressure limb difference (>20 mmHg)focal neurological deficitnew aortic murmur of aortic regurgitationA low-risk ADD score by itself, or when combined with a non-widened mediastinum (normal limits vary per projection, FFD and x-ray cassette positioning 6) on chest x-ray, makes the diagnosis of dissection unlikely.
However, it cannot confidently rule it out and negate the need for further imaging 2,3.
The aortic dissection detection risk score plus d-dimer for aortic syndrome has offered a more reliable method to rule out acute aortic syndrome 4,5.

Aortic dissection is the most common form of the acute aortic syndromes and a type of arterial dissection.
It occurs when blood enters the medial layer of the aortic wall through a tear or penetrating ulcer in the intima and tracks along the media, forming a second blood-filled channel within the wall.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe majority of aortic dissections are seen in elderly hypertensive patients.
In a very small minority, an underlying connective tissue disorder may be present.
Other conditions or predisposing factors may also be encountered, in which case they will be reflected in the demographics.
Examples include 5:structural aortic abnormalitiesbicuspid aortic valveaortic coarctationabnormal connective tissuesMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndromeTurner syndromepregnancyintra-aortic balloon pumps 7ciprofloxacin use (unclear if class effect for fluoroquinolone agents) 20fluoroquinolones seem to promote loss of extracellular matrix integrity, by several mechanismsin the UK caution is now advised in using these agents in high risk patients 21bicuspid aortic valveaortic coarctationabnormal connective tissuesMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndromeMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndromefluoroquinolones seem to promote loss of extracellular matrix integrity, by several mechanismsin the UK caution is now advised in using these agents in high risk patients 21The duration of aortic dissection is arbitrarily categorized into three phases 18,19:acute: within 14 days of first symptom onsetsubacute: between 14 days to 3 monthschronic: more than 3 months from initial onset of symptomsPatients are often hypertensive (although they may be normotensive or hypotensive) and present with anterior or posterior chest pain and a tearing sensation in the chest.
There may be a difference in blood pressure between the two arms depending on where the dissection occurs.
Depending on the extent of dissection and occlusion of aortic branches, end-organ ischemia may also be present (seen in up to 27% of cases) 5, including:abdominal organ ischemialimb ischemiaischemic or embolic strokeparaplegia: involvement of the artery of AdamkiewiczIf the aortic dissection involves the aortic root it may result in involvement of the coronary arteries and can present similarly to ST-elevation myocardial infarction on an ECG.
However, treating these patients with antiplatelets/anticoagulation could be disastrous in aortic dissection.
Some cases of aortic dissection may result in rupture, causing collapse and often death.
Signs of cardiac tamponade (Beck's triad) may also be encountered if rupture occurs into the pericardial space.
There have been efforts to construct a clinical decision rule stratify risk of acute aortic dissection and avoid over-investigation.
The aortic dissection detection risk score (ADD-RS) combined with a negative d-dimer test has been demonstrated to be effective in reducing unnecessary exams, however, it has not been widely accepted into clinical practice and requires further validation 13,14.The normal lumen lined by intima is called the true lumen and the blood-filled channel in the media is called the false lumen.
In most cases the vessel wall is abnormal.
Causes include:hypertension (pathogenesis: medial degeneration)inherited connective tissue disorders (pathogenesis: medial degeneration)Marfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndrome atherosclerosis (pathogenesis: penetrating ulcer)vasculitis (pathogenesis: inflammation)pregnancy (pathogenesis: unknown)iatrogenic: aortic catheterization, intra-aortic balloon pumpMarfan syndromeEhlers-Danlos syndrome Imaging is essential in delineating the morphology and extent of the dissection as well as allowing for classification (which dictates management).
Two classification systems are in common usage, both of which divide dissections according to the involvement of the ascending aorta:In recent years, the Stanford classification has gained favor with cardiothoracic surgeons.
Approximately 60% of dissections involve the ascending aorta (Stanford A or DeBakey I and II) 5.Aortic dissection are also sometimes classified as communicating versus non-communicating 16,17.A new classification system was proposed which is referred with the acronym DISSECT (duration, intimal tear, size of dissected aorta, segmental extent of involvement, clinical complications, and thrombosis of the false lumen) 18.Chest radiography may be normal or demonstrate a number of suggestive findings, including:widened mediastinum: >8.0-8.8 cm at the level of the aortic knob on portable anteroposterior chest radiographs 9,10, although this upper limit of normal varies (may be significantly larger) depending on projection, FFD and x-ray cassette positioning 15double aortic contourirregular aortic contourinward displacement of atherosclerotic calcification (>1 cm from the aortic margin) 9,11Depending on ethology, there may be signs of periaortic or mediastinal hematoma which include:obscuration of the aortic knobopacification of the AP windowdeviation of mediastinal structuresesophagus or NGT to the righttrachea to the rightleft main bronchus inferiorly (decreased angle from the horizontal)increased thickness of the left and/or right paratracheal stripeapical capping, particularly on the leftesophagus or NGT to the righttrachea to the rightleft main bronchus inferiorly (decreased angle from the horizontal)CT, especially with arterial contrast enhancement (CTA) is the investigation of choice, able not only to diagnose and classify the dissection but also to evaluate for distal complications.
It has reported sensitivity and specificity of nearly 100% 3,5.Non-contrast CT may demonstrate only subtle findings; however, a high-density mural hematoma is often visible.
Displacement of atherosclerotic calcification into the lumen is also a frequently identified finding.
Dissections involving the aortic root should ideally be assessed with ECG-gated CTA which nearly totally eliminates pulsation artefact.
Pulsation artefact can mimic dissection, is very common and seen in up to 92% of non-gated CTA studies 8.Contrast-enhanced CT (preferably CTA) gives excellent detail.
Findings include 1-3,5:intimal flapdouble lumendilatation of the aortacomplications (see below)an atypical variant that may be seen is an aortic intramural hematomaMercedes-Benz sign in the case of a "triple-barreled" dissectionwindsock signAn essential part of the assessment of aortic dissection is identifying the true lumen, as the placement of an endoluminal stent graft in the false lumen can have dire consequences.
Distinguishing between the two is often straightforward, but in some instances, no clear continuation of one lumen with normal artery can be identified.
In such instances, a number of features are helpful 3:true lumen often compressed by the false lumen and the smaller of the twoouter wall calcifications (helpful in acute dissections)origin of celiac trunk, SMA and right renal artery usually from true lumenfalse lumen often larger lumen size due to higher false luminal pressures at risk for rupture due to reduced elastic recoil and dilationbeak signcobweb sign (as slender linear areas of low attenuation specific to the false lumen due to residual ribbons of media that have incompletely sheared away during the dissection process) 3often of lower contrast density due to delayed opacificationmaybe thrombosed and seen as mural low density only (more common in chronic dissections)origin of left renal artery usually from false lumensurrounds true lumen in Stanford type A often compressed by the false lumen and the smaller of the twoouter wall calcifications (helpful in acute dissections)origin of celiac trunk, SMA and right renal artery usually from true lumenoften larger lumen size due to higher false luminal pressures at risk for rupture due to reduced elastic recoil and dilationbeak signcobweb sign (as slender linear areas of low attenuation specific to the false lumen due to residual ribbons of media that have incompletely sheared away during the dissection process) 3often of lower contrast density due to delayed opacificationmaybe thrombosed and seen as mural low density only (more common in chronic dissections)origin of left renal artery usually from false lumensurrounds true lumen in Stanford type A Chronic dissection flaps are often thicker and straighter than those seen in acute dissections 3.Transesophageal echocardiography (TOE) has very high sensitivity and specificity for assessment of acute aortic dissection, but due to limited access and its invasive nature, it has largely been replaced by CTA (or MRA in some instances) 5.Although in general MRA has been reserved for follow-up examinations, rapid non-contrast imaging techniques (e.g. true FISP) may see MRI having a larger role to play in the acute diagnosis, particularly in patients with impaired renal function 4.
It has similar sensitivity and specificity to CTA and TOE 5 but suffers from limited availability and the difficulties inherent in performing MRI on acutely unwell patients.
Conventional digital subtraction angiography has historically been the gold standard investigation.
CTA has now replaced it as the first line investigation, not only due to it being non-invasive but also on account of better delineation of the poorly opacifying false lumen, intramural hematoma and end-organ ischemia.
Angiography still is required for endoluminal repair.
Risks of angiography include general risks of angiography plus the risk of catheterizing the false lumen and causing aortic rupture.aggressive blood pressure control with beta blockers as they reduce both blood pressure and also heart rate hence reduce extra pressure on the aortic wallimmediate surgical repair (for type A dissection or complicated type B dissection)Complications of all types of aortic dissection include:dissection and occlusion of branch vesselsabdominal organ ischemialimb ischemiaischemic strokeparaplegia: involvement of artery of Adamkiewiczdistal thromboembolismaneurysmal dilatation: this is an indication for endovascular or surgical intervention 6 aortic ruptureabdominal organ ischemialimb ischemiaischemic strokeparaplegia: involvement of artery of AdamkiewiczA Stanford type A dissection may also result in:coronary artery occlusionaortic incompetence rupture into pericardial sac with resulting cardiac tamponade Although the combination of blood pressure control and surgical intervention has significantly lowered in-hospital mortality, it remains significant, at 10-35%.
Over the 10 years following diagnosis another 15-30% of patients require surgery for life-threatening complications 5.The differential on chest x-ray is that of a dilated thoracic aorta.
On CT, a number of entities that can mimic a dissection should be considered 5:pseudodissection due to aortic pulsation motion artefact (typically left anterior and right posterior aspects of the ascending aorta)pseudodissection due to contrast streaksmural thrombusintramural hematoma: really an atypical type of aortic dissection and part of the acute aortic syndromepenetrating atherosclerotic ulcer which is part of the acute aortic syndromeadjacent atelectasisClinically, a number of causes of acute chest pain are often considered:acute coronary syndromeacute pulmonary embolismpneumoniaBornholm disease: a diagnosis of exclusion, rarely thought about.
CT usually normal, or occasionally non-specific pleural inflammation and/or infiltrates.

The aortic hiatus is one of the three major apertures through the diaphragm and lies at the level of T12.
Strictly speaking, it is not a real aperture in the diaphragm, but an osseoaponeurotic opening between it and the vertebral column.
The hiatus is situated slightly to the left of the midline and is bounded anteriorly by the crura and posteriorly by L1.A number of structures pass through the aortic hiatus:aortaazygos vein and hemiazygos veinthoracic ductThe vertebral levels of the 3 main diaphragmatic apertures can be remembered by this mnemonic.

Aortic intramural hematoma (IMH) is an atypical form of aortic dissection due to hemorrhage into the wall from the vasa vasorum without an intimal tear.
It is part of the acute aortic syndrome spectrum.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisTypically aortic intramural hematomas are seen in older hypertensive patients.
The same condition may also develop as a result of blunt chest trauma with aortic wall injury or a penetrating atherosclerotic ulcer 1,2.The clinical features of IMH are those of the acute aortic syndromes, namely chest pain radiating to the back and hypertension.
This condition is thought to begin with spontaneous rupture of the vasa vasorum, the blood vessels that penetrate the outer half of the aortic media from the adventitia and arborize within the media to supply the aortic wall 2.The hematoma propagates along the medial layer of the aorta.
Consequently, intramural hematoma weakens the aorta and may progress either to outward rupture of the aortic wall or to inward disruption of the intima, the latter leading to a communicating aortic dissection 2.Similar to aortic dissections, intramural hematomas are classified according to the Stanford classification 4:type A: involves the ascending aorta, with or without descending aortic involvementtype B: confined to the descending aorta, distal to the origin of the left subclavian arteryThe DeBakey classification can also be used 5.
Acute intramural hematomas appear as focal, crescentic, high-attenuating (60-70 HU) regions of eccentrically thickened aortic wall on non-contrast CT (high-attenuation crescent sign).
Narrow window width is essential for identifying subtle lesions 6.
Intimal calcification may be displaced inwards, best appreciated on the non-contrast phase.
The lesions exhibit low attenuation in relation to the aortic lumen on post-contrast CT and can be far more subtle, hence a non-contrast phase before CTA is often done in an acute aortic syndrome protocol.
Unlike aortic dissection, no intimal flap is present on the CTA.An intramural hematoma (IMH) may be readily visualized with transesophageal echocardiography, which offers superior visualization of the aorta than is usually available via transthoracic examinations.
Defining features include 10:crescentic thickening of the aortic wall normal aortic wall thickness < 3 mmwall thickness must exceed 7 mm to diagnose IMHwall demonstrates mixed echogenicitypredominantly echodense with scattered internal echolucenciesno internal flow detectablecolor flow Doppler interrogation important to differentiate from aortic dissectionthe true lumen of a dissection will demonstrate systolic flowvariable flow patterns may be present in a false lumen, which tends to expand in size during diastolelack of an intimal (dissection) flapthe luminal surface in IMH tends to be smooth and continuousnormal aortic wall thickness < 3 mmwall thickness must exceed 7 mm to diagnose IMHwall demonstrates mixed echogenicitypredominantly echodense with scattered internal echolucenciespredominantly echodense with scattered internal echolucenciescolor flow Doppler interrogation important to differentiate from aortic dissectionthe true lumen of a dissection will demonstrate systolic flowvariable flow patterns may be present in a false lumen, which tends to expand in size during diastolethe true lumen of a dissection will demonstrate systolic flowvariable flow patterns may be present in a false lumen, which tends to expand in size during diastolethe luminal surface in IMH tends to be smooth and continuousMRI may also detect the abnormality but conventional angiography will not.
If an intramural hematoma involves the ascending aorta (Stanford A), treatment is surgical to prevent rupture and progression to a classic aortic dissection.
Conservative management is indicated for an intramural hematoma of the descending aorta (Stanford B).77% of intramural hematomas regress at 3 yearssurvival of >90% at 5 years 7Untreated, an intramural hematoma can be life-threatening as it can lead to:aortic ruptureaortic dissectionaortic aneurysmThe main differential diagnoses are:thrombosed false lumen in classic aortic dissection: typically spirals longitudinally around the aorta whereas an intramural hematoma usually maintains a constant circumferential relationship with the aortic wallaortitis: typically shows concentric uniform thickening of the aortic wall with or without peri-aortic inflammatory stranding, whereas an intramural hematoma is often eccentric in configuration

The aortic isthmus is the part of the aorta just distal to the origin of the left subclavian artery at the site of the ductus arteriosus.
This portion of the aorta is partly constricted in the fetus because of the lack of flow within the aortic sac and ascending aorta.
It marks the partial separation of fetal blood flow derived from the right and left ventricles.
Derived from the Ancient Greek ισθμος (isthmos) meaning a neck of land 3.most common anatomical area of traumatic thoracic aortic injuries in patients surviving long enough to be imaged 1the site of the ductus diverticulum which is an anatomical variant of the aorta that should be differentiated from an aortic pseudoaneurysm in the setting of trauma 2

The aortic knob or knuckle refers to the frontal chest x-ray appearance of the distal aortic arch as it curves posterolaterally to continue as the descending thoracic aorta.
It appears as a laterally-projecting bulge, as the medial aspect of the aorta cannot be seen separate from the mediastinum.
It forms the superior border of the left cardiomediastinal contour.
The aortic knob may become enlarged in:aortic dissectioncertain congenital heart diseases, e.g.  patent ductus arteriosus,  truncus arteriosus, valvular insufficiency, severe tetralogy of Fallotpost-stenotic dilatationsystemic hypertensionthoracic aortic aneurysmtraumatic aortic injuryThe aortic knob may be small or absent in:atrial or ventricular septal defectshypoplastic left heart syndromeinterrupted aortic archesThe aortic knob may be obscured by:adjacent pulmonary masses, e.g. lung cancertraumatic aortic injuries

An aortic nipple is seen in about 10% of PA chest x-rays on the lateral surface of the aortic arch/aortic knob.
It represents the left superior intercostal vein.
When prominent, superior vena cava obstruction should be considered as the left superior intercostal vein serves as a collateral pathway.

Differentiation of aortic pseudoaneurysm from ductus diverticulum is critical, particularly in the trauma setting.
A traumatic aortic pseudoaneurysm is a surgical emergency whereas a ductus diverticulum is a normal anatomic variant.
The following are differentiating features:location: often seen along the inferior surface of the aortic isthmus 1angle with the aortic wall: acute anglecalcification: not presentother supportive findings: signs of regional traumatic injuries such as an intimal flap or hematoma nearby within the aortic wall and/or mediastinumlocation: usually found at the anteromedial aspect of the aortic isthmus 2angle with the aortic wall: often gentle, obtuse angle calcification: an important differentiating point when presentabsence of other supportive findings

Aortic pseudoaneurysms typically occur as a result of trauma +/- intervention, a considered subset of traumatic aortic injury in the majority of cases.
They can be acute or chronic.
PathologyDifferential diagnosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisAortic pseudoaneurysms are contained ruptures of the aorta in which the majority of the aortic wall has been breached, and luminal blood is held in only by a thin rim of the remaining wall or adventitia.
They typically occur from focal aortic transection of which 85% are the result of penetrating trauma (gunshot or stab wounds) and 15% of cases from blunt trauma (motor vehicle accidents or falls).
They also occur from non-traumatic pathologies such as penetrating atherosclerotic ulcers 5.Characteristically occur along the undersurface of the aortic isthmus at or near the site of the ductus arteriosus 6.If at the level of the aortic arch, consider:ductus diverticulumFor differentiating features, see aortic pseudoaneursym versus ductus diverticulum.thoracic aortic injuryaortic aneurysmthoracic aortic aneurysmabdominal aortic aneurysmthoracic aortic aneurysmabdominal aortic aneurysm

An aortic root abscess is a serious complication of infective endocarditis.
Abscesses tend to be saccular in shape, range from 1 to 3 cm in diameter.
Depending on sinus of origin, extended beneath the main and right pulmonary arteries or into the interventricular septum or mitral annulus.
May show a markedly thickened area around the aortic root 2.
Locules of gas may additionally be present in some cases.
Hybrid imaging with Gallium-67 SPECT may complement workup 4.
Fistulation into the mitral annulus

Aortic root dilatation refers to abnormal enlargement of the aortic root which may be focally aneurysmal or a more diffuse ectasia.
Aortic root dilatation is often completely asymptomatic and found incidentally 2.
In rare instances, it may present with a catastrophic complication such as an aortic dissection, aortic rupture, or congestive heart failure from aortic insufficiency.
Aortic root dilatation can occur in isolation but is often associated with other conditions including:connective tissue disordersMarfan syndromevascular Ehlers-Danlos syndromeLoeys-Dietz syndromebicuspid aortic valvefamilial thoracic aortic aneurysm diseasefragile X syndromeMarfan syndromevascular Ehlers-Danlos syndromeLoeys-Dietz syndrome

The aortic root is the first part of the aorta and connects the heart to the systemic circulation.
The aortic root lies between the junction of the aortic valve and ascending aorta.
It has several subparts 1:three aortic valve leaflets and leaflet attachmentsthree aortic sinuses of Valsalva: intraluminal space formed by the cuspsright and left contain coronary aorta ostia, with a third non-coronary aortic sinus located posteriorlythree interleaflet trigones: space between the cusps and the annulussinotubular junction, which divides the aortic root from the ascending aortaright and left contain coronary aorta ostia, with a third non-coronary aortic sinus located posteriorlyAll the components of the aortic root coordinate their functions to produce an effect that manages coronary perfusion and left ventricular function and specific flow characteristics 1.
anterior: ascending aortaposterior: left ventriclemedial: right coronary arterylateral: left coronary arteryaortic root dilatationaortic root abscess

Aortic spindles are an anatomical variant of the proximal descending thoracic aorta.
It occurs just distal to the aortic isthmus and has a circumferential smooth bulging appearance.
ductus diverticulum: not circumferentialaortic pseudoaneurysmthoracic aortic aneurysm

An aortic transection, also known as a traumatic aortic rupture, is a type of traumatic aortic injury.
It is considered the second most common cause of death associated with motor vehicle accidents.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresIt occurs from a near-complete tear through "all the layers" of the aorta due to trauma (e.g. motor vehicle collision or a severe fall).It can be associated with a sudden and rapid deceleration of the heart and the aorta within the thoracic cavity.
It tends to most commonly occur in the proximal descending aorta, near where the left subclavian artery branches off from the aorta.
Tethering of the aorta by the ligamentum arteriosum makes the site prone to shearing forces such as those occurring in a sudden acceleration or deceleration eventCT angiography is the mainstay of diagnosis.
Features include contour disruption, active extravasation of intravenous contrast from the aorta, pseudo-aneurysm formation, an intimal flap, luminal filling defects and peri-aortic hematoma formation.
An aortic transection can be lethal and requires immediate surgical attention.
Patients who survive to the emergency department usually have partial-thickness tears of the aortic wall with pseudoaneurysm formation.thoracic aortic injurytraumatic aortic injury in the exam

Aortic valve calcification can be an important incidental observation thoracic radiography or CT imaging.
It is considered a marker for clinically significant aortic stenosis.
PrevalanceRadiographic assessmentReporting guidelinesSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresAccording to some reports aortic valve calcification may be prevalent as an incidental finding up to 18% of multi–detector CT scans dependent on study population 4.On chest radiography, and the presence of such calcifications are usually best seen on the lateral radiograph 1.ECD gated CT scans are best at assessment and quantificationSome authors suggest aortic valve calcification should always be commented upon in the radiology reports 6.aortic annular calcification

Aortic valve regurgitation, also known as aortic valve insufficiency or aortic valve incompetence, is a valvulopathy that describes leaking of the aortic valve during diastole that causes blood to flow in the reverse direction from the aorta and into the left ventricle.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesAortic regurgitation occurs slightly more in males, and the incidence increases progressively after the age of 50 years 1.Although chronic aortic regurgitation can be asymptomatic, even in reasonably severe disease, it eventually leads to left-predominant clinical features of heart failure such as dyspnea and angina 1-3.
Clinical examination classically reveals a widened pulse pressure, pulsus bisferiens, a volume loaded (‘thrusting’) apex beat, and a decrescendo early diastolic murmur (the Key-Hodgkin murmur) that is heard on praecordial auscultation 1-4.Occasionally the murmur heard may be holodiastolic, reflecting increased disease severity, and there may be an additional mid-diastolic Austin Flint murmur heard at the apex, attributed to the regurgitant jet striking the anterior mitral valve leaflet 1-3.Aortic regurgitation is also infamously associated with a number of eponymous signs, all of which are now rare due to the decreased incidence of syphilitic aortitis 2,5,6.
Detailed discussion of these rare signs is beyond the scope of this article.
Patients with chronic aortic regurgitation compensate for the leakage into the left ventricle by increasing total stroke volume (this is the forward ‘true’ stroke volume in addition to the volume leaking) ejected by the left ventricle through dilation and hypertrophy of the left ventricle 2,3.
This results in systolic hypertension, accounting for the wide pulse pressure, and aortic and arterial pressures rapidly falling during late systole and diastole, accounting for the timing of the murmur and the various eponymous signs 2,3.This adaptive mechanism is able to compensate for even severe aortic regurgitation, however eventually fails and the end-diastolic volume becomes too large and the ejection fraction and forward (rather than ‘total’) stroke volume both fall 2,3.
It is at this point where patients manifest clinical features of heart failure 2,3.Predisposing factors or causes of chronic aortic regurgitation can broadly be divided into being due to root disease or due to an intrinsic valvulopathy, although there is overlap 2,3:root disease: hypertension, congenital bicuspid aortic valve, connective tissue disorders (e.g. Marfan syndrome, Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, osteogenesis imperfecta, etc.),
aortic dissection, Takayasu arteritis, syphilitic aortitis, etc.valvular: rheumatic heart disease, calcific aortic valve disease (i.e. calcific aortic stenosis), bacterial infective endocarditis, prolapse, quadricuspid aortic valve, ankylosing spondylitis, syphilitic aortitis, radiation-induced heart disease, etc.
Acute aortic regurgitation is less common, but also exists, with specific causes 2,3:bacterial infective endocarditisaortic dissectiontraumatic ruptureiatrogenic (e.g. during transcatheter aortic valve implantation)Variable appearance on chest radiographs depending on stage and severity of the disease 1.
In chronic severe aortic regurgitation the apex may be displaced to the left on posterior-anterior projections, and there may be signs of congestive heart failure 1.
Furthermore, if the aortic regurgitation is due to aortic root disease, then aneurysmal dilation may be noted 1.
Echocardiography is useful for evaluating the cause of aortic regurgitation, either valvular or due to root disease, for assessing the regurgitant volume, and for assessing the left ventricle 3,7.
Various parameters are used in order to determine severity, such as 3,7:mildcentral jet has a width <25% of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)vena contracta < 0.3 cmregurgitant volume < 30 mL/beatregurgitant fraction < 30%effective regurgitant orifice area < 0.10 cm2moderatemeasurements are worse than mild aortic regurgitation but do not meet criteria for severe aortic regurgitationseverecentral jet has a width ≥65% of the LVOTvena contracta > 0.6 cmregurgitant volume ≥ 60 mL/beatregurgitant fraction ≥ 50%effective regurgitant orifice area ≥ 0.30 cm2central jet has a width <25% of the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT)vena contracta < 0.3 cmregurgitant volume < 30 mL/beatregurgitant fraction < 30%effective regurgitant orifice area < 0.10 cm2measurements are worse than mild aortic regurgitation but do not meet criteria for severe aortic regurgitationcentral jet has a width ≥65% of the LVOTvena contracta > 0.6 cmregurgitant volume ≥ 60 mL/beatregurgitant fraction ≥ 50%effective regurgitant orifice area ≥ 0.30 cm2In terms of assessing the left ventricle, although left ventricular size increases as the disease progresses, systolic function and ejection fraction may be normal even in severe aortic regurgitation 3,7.Failure of coaptation of aortic valve leaflets in diastole can be a suggestive feature.
Cardiac MRI (CMR) is able to provide a more detailed assessment of the aortic valve and left ventricular function 9.
It is able to highly accurately determine the size of the aortic root, assess regurgitant parameters, determine ejection fraction, measure left ventricular size, and detect underlying etiologies 9.The decision to treat aortic regurgitation is based on the etiology and severity.
Management involves a combination of lifestyle and pharmacotherapy measures (a similar armamentarium to that used in heart failure), aortic valve replacement, and aortic root reconstruction 2,3.
Details of this management is beyond the scope of this article.congestive heart failuresudden cardiac death from arrhythmiaaortic valve stenosis ('jet stenosis')valvular heart diseasegeneral aortic valve pathologies:aortic valve stenosis (and aortic valve sclerosis)aortic valve regurgitationspecific aortic valve pathologies:aortic valve atresiaaortic valve prolapsebicuspid aortic valvecongenital aortic valve stenosisquadricuspid aortic valveunicuspid aortic valveaortic valve stenosis (and aortic valve sclerosis)aortic valve regurgitationaortic valve atresiaaortic valve prolapsebicuspid aortic valvecongenital aortic valve stenosisquadricuspid aortic valveunicuspid aortic valve

Aortic valve stenosis is the most common valvulopathy and describes narrowing of the opening of the aortic valve between the aorta and the left ventricle.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisSee alsoReferencesCases and figuresAortic stenosis is the most common valvulopathy, present in up to one-quarter of all patients with chronic valvular heart disease 1,2.
The condition has a male predilection in a 4:1 ratio 1, and the incidence of degenerative aortic valve disease, the most common etiology of aortic stenosis, is increasing 1,2.The classic triad of symptoms caused by aortic stenosis is angina pectoris, dysnpoea, and syncope, however any left-predominant clinical features of heart failure may be present 1,2.
Generally these symptoms do not become prominent until significant stenosis is present (<1 cm2) 1.Clinical examination classically reveals a narrow pulse pressure, a slow-rising peripheral pulse, pulsus parvus et tardus (weak and delayed pulse) in the carotid pulse, a pressure loaded ('heaving') apex beat, and a crescendo-decrescendo mid-systolic (or ejection systolic) murmur that is heard on praecordial auscultation 1,2.
The murmur associated with aortic stenosis also characteristically radiates to the carotid arteries, and may also radiate to the apex which can mimic the murmur of mitral valve regurgitation, known as the Gallavardin phenomenon 3.Numerous clinical maneuvers can be used to distinguish aortic stenosis from the similar-sounding murmurs of hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy and pulmonary valve stenosis, such as the Valsalva maneuver and auscultation during inspiration respectively 1.
Aortic stenosis in adults is most commonly caused by degenerative calcification, especially in the setting of congenital aortic valve disease (most commonly a bicuspid aortic valve), chronic tri-leaflet deterioration, or previous rheumatic heart disease affecting the aortic valve 1,2.
This degenerative calcification shares many similarities to the process of atherosclerosis, and indeed many of the risk factors are the same, such as low LDL, diabetes mellitus, smoking, hypertension, chronic kidney disease, and the metabolic syndrome 1,2.The end-product of this atherosclerotic-like process is thickening of the valve leaflets (initially just 'aortic sclerosis') due to activation of inflammatory cascades, endothelial dysfunction, and valvular lipid accumulation 1,2.
Ultimately, the valvular myofibroblasts differentiate into osteoblasts resulting in calcium deposition on the valve ('calcific aortic stenosis') 1,2.
This process progressively causes a reduction in aortic valve area, resulting in progressive stenosis 1,2.This stenosis causes a left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction.
The turbulent blood flow from this LVOT obstruction explains the timing of the murmur and the various peripheral signs associated with aortic stenosis 1,2.
Moreover, this LVOT obstruction causes a systolic gradient to form between the aorta and left ventricle 1,2.
This gradient may progressively increase without any significant changes to left ventricular function because of compensatory left ventricular hypertrophy, appreciated clinically by the pressure loaded apex beat 1,2.However, this adaptive mechanism eventually fails and systolic and diastolic function declines and irreversible myocardial fibrosis develops.
It is at this point where patients manifest clinical features of heart failure 1,2.
There are numerous other predisposing factors and causes of aortic stenosis.
These can be classified by their anatomical position (supravalvular vs valvular vs subvalvular) and whether they are congenital or acquired etiologies 1,2,4.
Of note, supravalvular and subvalvular aortic stenosis often do not have the same degenerative pathogenesis as valvular aortic stenosis 1.supravalvular congenital: isolated or in syndromic association (e.g. William syndrome)acquired: post-surgical or sequela of aortitis (e.g. syphilitic aortitis, Takayasu arteritis, etc.)valvularcongenital (congenital aortic valve stenosis): most frequent cause of aortic valve stenosis age in patients between 15 and 65 of age and often arises in associated with anomalous valvesbicuspid aortic valve: deformed aortic valves with two functional leaflets or cusps which are often unequal in size (60%); a calcified bicuspid aortic valve is considered the most frequent form of adult aortic valve stenosistricuspid aortic valve: aortic valves with three functional leaflets or cusps which are often unequal in size (30%)unicommissural/unicuspid aortic valve: dome-like aortic valve with stenosis at very young age (10%) quadricuspid aortic valve (rare): generally predisposes to aortic valve regurgitation instead of aortic stenosisacquired rheumatic heart disease: rarely isolated aortic valve stenosis, thickened, shortened cusps, fused commissures, occurs always with aortic regurgitationsenile calcific aortic stenosis/degenerative aortic stenosis: as discussed aboveradiation-induced heart disease: generally a decade or more after exposure to mediastinal radiotherapysubvalvularcongenital subaortic membraneShone complexhypertrophic subaortic stenosis associated with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, generally not considered 'true' aortic stenosiscongenital: isolated or in syndromic association (e.g. William syndrome)acquired: post-surgical or sequela of aortitis (e.g. syphilitic aortitis, Takayasu arteritis, etc.)congenital (congenital aortic valve stenosis): most frequent cause of aortic valve stenosis age in patients between 15 and 65 of age and often arises in associated with anomalous valvesbicuspid aortic valve: deformed aortic valves with two functional leaflets or cusps which are often unequal in size (60%); a calcified bicuspid aortic valve is considered the most frequent form of adult aortic valve stenosistricuspid aortic valve: aortic valves with three functional leaflets or cusps which are often unequal in size (30%)unicommissural/unicuspid aortic valve: dome-like aortic valve with stenosis at very young age (10%) quadricuspid aortic valve (rare): generally predisposes to aortic valve regurgitation instead of aortic stenosisbicuspid aortic valve: deformed aortic valves with two functional leaflets or cusps which are often unequal in size (60%); a calcified bicuspid aortic valve is considered the most frequent form of adult aortic valve stenosistricuspid aortic valve: aortic valves with three functional leaflets or cusps which are often unequal in size (30%)unicommissural/unicuspid aortic valve: dome-like aortic valve with stenosis at very young age (10%) quadricuspid aortic valve (rare): generally predisposes to aortic valve regurgitation instead of aortic stenosisacquired rheumatic heart disease: rarely isolated aortic valve stenosis, thickened, shortened cusps, fused commissures, occurs always with aortic regurgitationsenile calcific aortic stenosis/degenerative aortic stenosis: as discussed aboveradiation-induced heart disease: generally a decade or more after exposure to mediastinal radiotherapyrheumatic heart disease: rarely isolated aortic valve stenosis, thickened, shortened cusps, fused commissures, occurs always with aortic regurgitationsenile calcific aortic stenosis/degenerative aortic stenosis: as discussed aboveradiation-induced heart disease: generally a decade or more after exposure to mediastinal radiotherapycongenital subaortic membraneShone complexhypertrophic subaortic stenosis associated with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, generally not considered 'true' aortic stenosissubaortic membraneShone complexhypertrophic subaortic stenosis associated with hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy, generally not considered 'true' aortic stenosisVariable appearance on chest radiographs depending on stage and severity of the disease 2,5.
In early disease, the chest radiograph can be entirely normal or it may show dilatation of the ascending aorta with a normal heart size.
Differentiation with hypertension can usually be made as in hypertension the entire descending aorta is enlarged 2,5.However, late in the disease, the chest radiograph may reveal valvular calcifications (if valvular aortic stenosis) and/or cardiomegaly with features of heart failure, such as pulmonary venous congestion and pulmonary interstitial/alveolar edema 2,5.
At this stage, especially in the absence of valvular calcifications, it is not possible to differentiate aortic stenosis from other causes of heart failure 2,5.
Echocardiography is useful for evaluating the anatomical location of the stenosis, either supravalvular, valvular, or subvalvular, for assessing the aortic valve area and jet velocity, and for assessing the left ventricle.
Various parameters are used in order to determine severity, such as 2,6:aortic sclerosisaortic jet velocity ≤2.5 m/smild aortic stenosisaortic jet velocity 2.6-2.9 m/smean gradient is <20 mmHgaortic valve area (AVA) >1.5 cm2aortic valve area indexed to body surface area (AVA/BSA) >0.85 cm2/m2moderate aortic stenosisaortic jet velocity 3.0-4.0 m/smean gradient 20-40 mmHgAVA 1.0-1.5 cm2AVA/BSA 0.60-0.85 cm2/m2severe aortic stenosisaortic jet velocity >4 m/smean gradient >40 mmHgAVA <1 cm2AVA/BSA <0.60 cm2/m2aortic jet velocity ≤2.5 m/saortic jet velocity 2.6-2.9 m/smean gradient is <20 mmHgaortic valve area (AVA) >1.5 cm2aortic valve area indexed to body surface area (AVA/BSA) >0.85 cm2/m2aortic jet velocity 3.0-4.0 m/smean gradient 20-40 mmHgAVA 1.0-1.5 cm2AVA/BSA 0.60-0.85 cm2/m2aortic jet velocity >4 m/smean gradient >40 mmHgAVA <1 cm2AVA/BSA <0.60 cm2/m2In cases where there is a low AVA and also a low mean gradient, this may either indicate true severe aortic stenosis or pseudo-severe aortic stenosis due to low cardiac output 6.
In these cases, low-dose dobutamine may be given to differentiate between these two entities 6.Cardiac CT confirms, with greater detail, findings on plain radiograph 7-10.
Moreover, it is able to determine an aortic valve calcification score, whereby a high aortic valve calcification score may indicate severe aortic stenosis, particularly in patients with non-rheumatic acquired calcific aortic stenosis 7-10.Cardiac MRI (CMR) is able to provide a more detailed structural and dynamic assessment of the aortic valve and left ventricle, in particular 5,7:structural assessment on spin echo MR sequencebicuspid or unicuspid aortic valvepost stenotic dilatation of ascending aortasymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy wall thickness (≥12 mm)increased LV massdynamic assessment on cine GRE or b-SSEPthickened valve leaflets with reduce excursion during systolesize and extent of the high-velocity jet into the ascending aortahyperdynamic LV contraction in compensated statebicuspid or unicuspid aortic valvepost stenotic dilatation of ascending aortasymmetrical left ventricular hypertrophy wall thickness (≥12 mm)increased LV massthickened valve leaflets with reduce excursion during systolesize and extent of the high-velocity jet into the ascending aortahyperdynamic LV contraction in compensated stateThe decision to treat aortic stenosis is based on the severity 1,2.
Management involves a combination of lifestyle and pharmacotherapy measures (a similar armamentarium to that used in heart failure), balloon valvuloplasty and aortic valve replacement 1,2.
Aortic valve replacement can be in the form of:transcatheter aortic valve implantation (TAVI): percutaneously inserted valve that is deployed within the stenotic native valve, useful in frailer patients but long term resilience unclear at this stageconventional aortic valve replacement: involves midline sternotomy, cardiopulmonary bypass and replacement with a metal or bioprosthetic valve, still the treatment of choice in younger patientsFurther details of this management is beyond the scope of this article.congestive heart failuresudden cardiac death from arrhythmiaaortic valve regurgitationcalcified cerebral embolismHeyde syndromevalvular heart diseasegeneral aortic valve pathologies:aortic valve stenosis (and aortic valve sclerosis)aortic valve regurgitationspecific aortic valve pathologies:aortic valve atresiaaortic valve prolapsebicuspid aortic valvecongenital aortic valve stenosisquadricuspid aortic valveunicuspid aortic valveaortic valve stenosis (and aortic valve sclerosis)aortic valve regurgitationaortic valve atresiaaortic valve prolapsebicuspid aortic valvecongenital aortic valve stenosisquadricuspid aortic valveunicuspid aortic valve

The aortic valve (AV) is one of the four cardiac valves.
It is the semilunar valve that allows blood to exit the left ventricle (LV).
It opens during systole and closes during diastole.
The valve has left, right and posterior cusps, the bases of which attach around the valve orifice to a fibrous ring or annulus, forming part of the fibrous skeleton of the heart.
The cusps attach to each other and the annulus at the commissures.
The free edge of each cusp (the lunule) is thickened where it contacts the free edges of adjacent cusps and at the angulated apex of each free edge there is further nodular thickening, known as the nodule.
The cusps bulge inferiorly into the outflow tract of the left ventricle.
Immediately superior to the cusps, the ascending aorta is mildly dilated forming the aortic sinuses, the spaces between the dilated wall of the aorta and the cusps of the semilunar valve.
During systole these sinuses prevent the cusps from flattening against the walls of the sinuses, which may restrict valve closure during diastole.
The left coronary artery arises from the left aortic sinus and the right coronary artery arises from the right aortic sinus.
The posterior sinus does not have a vessel arising from it, and is therefore referred to as the non-coronary sinus.
The aortic valve lies obliquely and is inferior and to the right of the pulmonary valve (PV).bicuspid aortic valvequadricuspid aortic valveunicuspid aortic valveaortic stenosisaortic regurgitationtransposition of the great arteriestetralogy of Fallotaortic valve calcification

The aortic-pulmonary stripe is an uncommon feature of frontal chest radiographs and was first described by Keats in 1972 1.It is formed by the interface of the pleural surface of the anterior segment of the left upper lobe contacting the mediastinal fat that is anterolateral to the pulmonary trunk or left pulmonary artery and aortic arch 1-3.
Abnormal appearances may reflect different pathologies:elevationpneumomediastinum 1increased lateral convexityanterior mediastinal mass 2pneumomediastinum 1anterior mediastinal mass 2appears as a triangular opacity or stripe with a lateral edge that extends, from superior to inferior, obliquely across the aortic arch and pulmonary artery 1,2not commonly seen on frontal chest x-rays 1

Aorto-left renal vein fistula is an extremely rare complication of abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture.
The initial clinical presentation is often non-specific, however, characteristic imaging findings, if recognized early, can lead to prompt diagnosis and assist in surgical planning.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisSpontaneous aorto-left renal vein fistula most commonly involved a variant retroaortic left renal vein and less commonly seen in trauma or post-surgical complications.
Clinical presentation is often non-specific, which includes abdominal, left flank and groin pain.
It can mimic gastrointestinal and urologic conditions.
Specific clinical findings include palpable pulsatile aorta or bruits on auscultation.
Hematuria is often a presenting feature and most often the patient has an abnormal renal function 1.The variant retroaortic left renal vein traverses between the aorta and the vertebral column.
It is proposed that the pulsation of an abdominal aortic aneurysm over time result in pressure necrosis and the development of a spontaneous aorto-left renal vein fistula.
This is typically associated with a contained retroperitoneal rupture of the abdominal aortic aneurysm.
Fistula formation leads to a drastic elevated left renal venous pressure, characterized by distended renal veins and an enlarged left kidney.
When this venous pressure gradient overcomes the arterial pressure, the left kidney becomes non-perfused.
Numerous venous collateral vessels, most often the paravertebral but also gonadal venous channels, become distended.
Prompt diagnosis is critical to prevent venous infarction of the left kidney and ensuing mortality.
Post-traumatic aorto-left renal vein fistulas may result from complications of penetrating abdominal trauma (e.g. gunshot and stabbing injuries) 2-4.The imaging findings on CT complements on the pathophysiologic process described above.
Careful multiplanar evaluation of the left posterolateral aspect of the aorta is paramount to identify the location of the fistula and site of the retroperitoneal abdominal aortic aneurysm rupture.
Beside the abdominal aortic aneurysm, a non-perfused and enlarged left kidney is often what catches the eye of the radiologist.
Hemorrhage/hematoma in the renal pelvis is a common associated finding, although the exact mechanism is not elucidated.
The constellation of all these features should prompt the radiologist of the diagnosis.
The use of 3D reformat is a delight for the vascular surgeon.
Duplex sonography, MRI and catheter angiography may also demonstrate the abnormal communication between the abdominal aorta and left renal vein as well as the associated findings 5.
Treatment options include surgical and endovascular repair.
Mortality following repair of the aorto-left renal vein fistulas is less in cases caused by trauma compared to those formed as complications of abdominal aortic aneurysms 3.aorto-caval fistula

Aortitis refers to a general descriptor that involves a broad category of infectious and non-infectious conditions where there is inflammation (i.e. vasculitis) of the aortic wall.
The presentation is non-specific with fever, pain and weight loss.
infectioussyphilitic aortitistuberculous aortitispyogenic aortitis: especially Salmonella infectionaortitis due to HIVinfected (mycotic) aortic aneurysmnon-infectiousgiant cell arteritis Takayasu arteritisother rheumatologic disordersrheumatoid arthritissystemic lupus erythematosus granulomatosis with polyangiitisBehçet diseasepolyarteritis nodosamicroscopic polyangiitisHLA-B27–associated seronegative spondyloarthropathiesReiter syndrome ankylosing spondylitisCogan syndromechronic periaortitisidiopathic aortitisradiation-induced aortitisIgG4-related cardiovascular diseasesyphilitic aortitistuberculous aortitispyogenic aortitis: especially Salmonella infectionaortitis due to HIVinfected (mycotic) aortic aneurysmgiant cell arteritis Takayasu arteritisother rheumatologic disordersrheumatoid arthritissystemic lupus erythematosus granulomatosis with polyangiitisBehçet diseasepolyarteritis nodosamicroscopic polyangiitisHLA-B27–associated seronegative spondyloarthropathiesReiter syndrome ankylosing spondylitisCogan syndromechronic periaortitisidiopathic aortitisradiation-induced aortitisIgG4-related cardiovascular diseaserheumatoid arthritissystemic lupus erythematosus granulomatosis with polyangiitisBehçet diseasepolyarteritis nodosamicroscopic polyangiitisHLA-B27–associated seronegative spondyloarthropathiesReiter syndrome ankylosing spondylitisReiter syndrome ankylosing spondylitis

Aorto-ventricular tunnel (AVT) is an extremely rare form of congenital heart disease, representing an anomalous extracardiac communication between the ascending aorta and the left or right ventricles.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential DiagnosisReferencesIn most cases the anomalous communication is between the aorta and the left ventricle and therefore the term aorto-left ventricular tunnel (ALVT) is used.
Rarely the abnormal connection is with the right ventricle, in which case the term aorto-right ventricular tunnel (ARVT) is used instead.
Approximately 130 cases have been described in the literature, with an estimated prevalence ranging from ~0.001% to ~0.1% of all cases of congenital heart disease 1,4.
There is a clear male predilection of 2:1, male: female cases.
Very few cases have been seen in those with African or Asian ethnicity 4.
In ~90% of cases, the connection is between the aorta and the left ventricle; a right ventricle connection only occurs in ~10%.The anomaly usually occurs in isolation, and does not seem to be part of a syndrome.
It can be diagnosed antenatally on routine ultrasonography.
On physical examination, a "to-and-fro" murmur may be appreciated on precordial auscultation, along with an easily palpable pulse (due to rapid aortic runoff).The commonest presentation is heart failure in the first year of life although there is a wide spectrum of severity, from in utero death, to rapid postnatal heart failure, and even some adults who are entirely asymptomatic.
Congenital communication between the ascending aorta, distal to the sinotubular junction, and the left or right ventricles.
The communication usually occurs distal to the right sinus of Valsalva.
The anomaly typically occurs in isolation, independent of other anomalies.
The spectrum of severity of the condition is related to the size of the anomalous connection and the degree of aortic incompetence.
Transthoracic echocardiography (both 2-D and 3-D have been used) is the modality of choice.
The tunnel can be seen in its entirety on the parasternal long-axis view, as can both the aortic and ventricular apertures.
On color Doppler the abnormal blood flows between the aorta and left/right ventricle may be seen.
MRA has been used with some success, but is of course, not widely available.
Rarely used any more in view of its invasive nature and ionizing radiation.
It is reserved for the trickier cases, in which non-invasive modalities have been equivocal.
It can be diagnosed antenatally after gestation week 18.
In 2015 a new sonographic finding, the cockade sign was described for the antenatal diagnosis of aorto-left ventricular tunnel 2.In the majority of cases, even when the patient is asymptomatic, early surgical intervention is required to prevent permanent left ventricular dysfunction.
The first case, an aorto-left ventricular tract, was reported in 1957 by Jesse E Edwards (1912-2008), American cardiac pathologist 5, and Howard B Burchell (1908-2009), American cardiologist 4.sinus of Valsalva fistula a sequela of rupturing an aneurysm of the sinus of Valsalvamore caudal location of anomalous connection (aorto-ventricular tunnel affects more craniad tubular aorta)a sequela of rupturing an aneurysm of the sinus of Valsalvamore caudal location of anomalous connection (aorto-ventricular tunnel affects more craniad tubular aorta)

Aortocaval fistula  is a rare and devastating complication of abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA), wherein the aneurysm erodes into the inferior vena cava.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisSpontaneous rupture of an abdominal aortic aneurysm into the adjacent inferior vena cava occurs in <1% of all aneurysms and in ~3% of ruptured aortic aneurysms 1.The features can be very atypical leading to a delay in diagnosis.
The various factors that influence the clinical presentations are the origin, size, location and duration of the fistula:high output cardiac failure bilateral pedal edema (venous hypertension in the lower half of body)renal insufficiency (reduced renal blood flow)hematuriacontinuous bruitAortography is the modality of choice.
Color Doppler, CT and MRI may also demonstrate the same non-invasively.
At times, the presence of a mural thrombus may obstruct the fistula.
Urgent surgical exploration and repair.
Operative mortality of spontaneous aortocaval fistula is about 20 to 55%, figures being high predominantly due to delayed diagnosis or misdiagnosis.aorto-left renal vein fistula

Aortoenteric fistula are pathologic communications between the aorta (or aortoiliac tree) and the gastrointestinal tract, and represent an uncommon cause of catastrophic gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
Aortic fistulas may be considered primary (associated with complicated abdominal aortic aneurysm) or secondary (associated with graft repair).
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe annual incidence of primary aortoenteric fistulas is thought to be around 0.007 per million while that of secondary aortoenteric fistulas is about ~1% (range 0.6-2%) 1.The incidence of secondary aortoenteric fistulas is found to be greater in patients following open aortic repair compared to patients with endovascular stent placement.classically, aortoenteric fistula may initially present with minor "herald" gastrointestinal hemorrhage, followed by a later catastrophic life-threatening gastrointestinal hemorrhageprimary aortoenteric fistula may present with recurrent septicemia with enteric pathogens A primary aortoenteric fistula forms when a large abdominal aortic aneurysm closely abuts bowel loops, usually the 3rd or 4th parts of the duodenum.
Due to long-standing pressure, the aneurysm slowly erodes into the bowel wall.
These are most commonly due to infected mycotic aneurysms.
Secondary aortoenteric fistulas are seen as a complication of aortic reconstructive surgery with or without the placement of an aortic stent-graft.
Secondary fistulas that result from perigraft infection may occur between 2 weeks and 10 years after surgery.
Direct signs include:ectopic gas adjacent to or within the aortathe presence of vascular contrast within the gastrointestinal tractIndirect signs include:bowel wall thickening overlying an aneurysmdisruption of the aortic fat coverretroperitoneal hematoma or hematoma within the bowel wall or lumenincreased perigraft soft tissuepseudoaneurysm formationdisruption of aneurysmal wrapincreased soft tissue between the graft and aneurysmal wrapThe only curative treatment is surgery.
Without prompt surgical intervention, mortality approaches 100%.
Operative mortality itself is as high as 50%.On imaging considerperigraft infection without fistulisation retroperitoneal fibrosisinfected (mycotic) aortic aneurysminfectious aortitisFirst described by Sir Astley Cooper (1768-1841), a British surgeon in the early 19th century 6.

Aortoiliac occlusive disease refers to complete occlusion of the aorta distal to the renal arteries.
TerminologyClinical presentationClassificationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisWhen the clinical triad of impotence, pelvis and thigh claudication, and absence of the femoral pulses are present, it may also be called Leriche syndrome, which usually affects younger (30-40 year old) males 9.Aortoiliac occlusive disease is more common in the elderly with an advanced atherosclerotic disease.
Acute onset is more common in female patients and is associated with poor outcome with approximately 50% mortality.
In acute cases, symptoms include the 6 Ps:painpulselessnesspallorparesthesiaparalysisprostrationIn chronic onset cases, mostly in arteriosclerosis, symptoms may include erectile dysfunction or impotence, claudication and absence of femoral pulses 11.The anatomical location of atheromatous lesions influence the classification and treatment choice 12:type I: confined to distal abdominal aorta and common iliac arteriestype II: as above with extension into the external iliac arteriestype III: aortoiliac segment and femoropopliteal vesselsAccording to the Trans Atlantic Inter Society Consensus II (TASC II) Leriche syndrome is a type D lesion 13.The condition can be acute or chronic.
There is endothelial damage resulting in inflammation and lipid accumulation in the tunica media and macrophages eventually leading to plaque formation and occlusive disease 11.
Complete infra-renal aortoiliac occlusion will display significant collateral circulation sustained by multiple anastomoses allowing reconstitution with the distal femoral arteries 13.Most often the occlusion occurs near the aortic bifurcation.
It typically begins at the distal aorta or common iliac artery origins and slowly progresses proximally and distally over time.arteriosclerosis: the main cause of this syndrome is an atherosclerotic obstruction of aortoiliac arteries 2vasculitisthrombosisAn extensive network of collateral parietal and visceral vessels may form to bypass any segment of the aortoiliac arterial system.
In abdominal aortoiliac stenosis/occlusion, the commonest collateral pathways to the lower extremities are 5:superior mesenteric artery > inferior mesenteric artery > superior rectal artery >middle and inferior rectal arteries > internal iliac arteries 10obturator / internal pudendal arteries > common femoral arteries 10intercostal, subcostal, and lumbar arteries > superior gluteal and iliolumbar arteries > internal iliac arteries > external iliac arteries.
intercostal, subcostal, and lumbar arteries > circumflex arteries > external iliac arteriessubclavian arteries > internal thoracic (mammary) arteries > superior epigastric arteries > inferior epigastric arteries > external iliac arteries (the Winslow Pathway 7)middle and inferior rectal arteries > internal iliac arteries 10obturator / internal pudendal arteries > common femoral arteries 10CT angiography is usually the best modality for assessment.
In patients where CT is not possible, contrast-enhanced MR angiography may be a good option 4.It allows direct anatomical visualization of the location of the stenosis and occlusion.
It also permits the assessment for the presence of a concomitant occlusive disease affecting visceral arteries, the type and extent of collateralization, and the level of the most proximal and distal arterial segments amenable to stent-graft placement.
Traditional surgical procedures for aortoiliac occlusive disease are 8 :aortoiliac endarterectomy (TEA)aortobifemoral bypass (AFB) patency rates of 90% at five years and 80% at ten years 11Tasc II type D lesions recommend surgery as the treatment of choice 13axillobifemoral bypass (extra-anatomic technique); used to avoid abdominal surgerypercutaneous transluminal angioplasty (PTA) and stentingpatency rates of 90% at five years and 80% at ten years 11Tasc II type D lesions recommend surgery as the treatment of choice 13Other more novel methods includecovered endovascular reconstruction of aortic bifurcation (CERAB) techniqueIt is named after French vascular surgeon René Leriche (1879–1955) who initially described the findings in 1948 3.Imaging differential considerations include:mid-aortic syndrome: occurs at or above renal artery level with the involvement of a longer segment and usually in much younger patients (usually 10-30 years old)

The aortomitral continuity (also known as the aortomitral curtain, aorticomitral junction, intervalvular fibrous body) is a fibrous sheet located between the noncoronary and left coronary leaflets of the aortic valve and anterior leaflet of the mitral valve.
It is attached by the left and right fibrous trigones to the left ventricular myocardium.ventricular tachycardia 1,2calcification and subannular perforation during transcatheter aortic valve implantation 3,4paravalvular abscess complicating infective endocarditis 5

Aortopulmonary septal defect (APSD), also known as aortopulmonary window (APW), is a congenital anomaly where there is an abnormal communication between the proximal aorta and the pulmonary trunk in the presence of separate aortic and pulmonary valves.
TerminologyEpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresAPSD should not be confused with the radiographic term aortopulmonary window, which refers to a mediastinal space on chest radiographs and CT scans.
Aortopulmonary septal defects occur in <1% of all cardiac malformations 1,2.The clinical presentation of aortopulmonary septal defects is dependent on the size of the defect and on the associated lesions.
The presentation is usually similar to that of other patients with left-to-right shunts.
Severe cases present as congestive heart failure.
Cardiac examination reveals an enlarged heart, and like patients with patent ductus arteriosus (PDA), the pulses are bounding.
A systolic murmur can be heard along the left sternal border.
However, unlike patients with a PDA, a diastolic component to the murmur is rare.
Patients with associated arch abnormalities frequently present with shock coinciding with the closing of the ductus arteriosus.
Aortopulmonary septal defect results when there is a failure of fusion of the two opposing conotruncal ridges that are responsible for separating the truncus arteriosus into the aorta and pulmonary artery.
The defect occurs between the ascending aorta and the main pulmonary artery and may be found just above the semilunar valves or between the more distal ascending aorta and main pulmonary artery.
It has similar hemodynamic features to a patent ductus arteriosus, or, even more so, to a common truncus arteriosus, the anatomical difference from the latter being the presence of two separate semilunar (aortic and pulmonary) valves 1,2.
Several classifications of APSD have been proposed at the time of writing (July 2016), this below-mentioned classification is most widely accepted in literature.
This classification separates APSD into four types 3:type I: proximal APSD located just above the sinus of Valsalva, a few millimeters above the semilunar valvetype II: distal APSD located in the uppermost portion of the ascending aortatype III: total defect involving the entire aortopulmonary septum or ascending aortatype IV: intermediate defect50-70% of all patients with APSD are associated with other cardiac malformations 3,4,5:arch anomaliesaortic arch hypoplasiacoarctationinterrupted aortic archventricular septal defect (VSD)atrial septal defect (ASD)right ventricular outflow tract (RVOT) anomaliestetralogy of Fallotpulmonary stenosispulmonary atresiaaortic origin of the right pulmonary arteryleft ventricular outflow tract obstructiontransposition of the great arteriescoronary anomaliesaortic arch hypoplasiacoarctationinterrupted aortic archtetralogy of Fallotpulmonary stenosispulmonary atresiaaortic origin of the right pulmonary arteryChest radiographs may show moderate to severe cardiomegaly (due to left atrial and ventricular enlargement) together with pulmonary plethora.
Allows direct visualization of the defect.
The defect can be best visualized from different views by echocardiographic study, including parasternal short and long axis views, high parasternal short-axis view and subcostal coronal view.
At Doppler echocardiography, abnormal continuous forward flow in the pulmonary arteries indicates the presence of an aortopulmonary communication 2.CT angiography allows direct visualization of the defect and associated anomalous anatomy.
Allows direct visualization of the anomalous anatomy.
SSFP cine sequences can offer additional functional assessment.
Early surgical or device closure is indicated as soon as the diagnosis is established to prevent congestive heart failure and pulmonary hypertension.
Associated cardiovascular defects should also be repaired.
The outcome of patients with this anomaly is excellent if correction is performed before complications of the disease arise 2.pulmonary hypertension Eisenmenger phenomenoncongestive heart failure

The aortopulmonary (aortic-pulmonary or AP) window (also known as APW, but see 'Terminology' below) is a radiological mediastinal space seen on frontal chest radiographs.
TerminologyGross anatomyRadiographic appearanceRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresThe term should also not be confused with an aortopulmonary septal defect, which is occasionally also called an aortopulmonary window, referring to a rare form of congenital heart disease where there is an opening between the aorta and the pulmonary trunk 4.
It is usually referred to with the acronym APW instead of AP window.
Also, be careful not to confuse the AP window with the aortic-pulmonary stripe.
The AP window boundaries are 1,2:superior: inferior wall of the aortic archinferior: superior wall of the left pulmonary arteryanterior: posterior wall of the ascending aortaposterior: anterior wall of the descending aortamedial: trachea; lateral wall of the left main bronchus; esophagus (anterior to posterior)lateral: pleural surface of the left lung contacting the superior boundary (aortic arch) and extending to the inferior boundary (left pulmonary artery)A variety of structures traverse the AP window 1-3:left phrenic nerveleft recurrent laryngeal nerveleft vagus nerveleft bronchial arteriesligamentum arteriosumfatlymph nodesleft recurrent laryngeal nerveThe AP window normally has a concave lateral border.
A straight lateral border can be considered normal if unchanged from the previous chest x-ray.
A newly straightened or convex lateral border is considered abnormal and has a number of causes 1,2:mediastinal lymphadenopathy (most common 3)prominent mediastinal fat (normal variant 3)aortic or bronchial artery aneurysmsmalignancy, e.g. nerve sheath tumor

Aortosternal venous compression refers to compression of the brachiocephalic vein as a result of its position between the sternum and the aorta(or regional arteries).
It can occur with normal as well as variant anatomy (aberrant right subclavian artery 1).It is asymptomatic in most cases although several symptomatic cases have been reported.
Symptomatic patients may be have left upper arm and neck swelling.
The first symptomatic case of the innominate vein is thought to have been described by Dr A Wurtz et.al in 1989 4.vascular compression syndromes

The Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) score is an illness severity score commonly used in critical care medicine to predict mortality upon admission to an intensive care unit.
CriteriaUseHistory and etymologyReferencesIt involves two sections - one assessing the severity of the acute illness and another to assess the pre-illness chronic medical status of the patient.
The worst values achieved by the patient in the first 24 hours of admission to the intensive care unit should be used 2.The following criteria are used in the calculation of the APACHE II score 2:past history of organ failure or immunocompromised state (e.g. NYHA Class IV heart failure, cirrhosis, CKD requiring dialysis)acute kidney injuryagetemperaturemean arterial pressureblood pHheart raterespiratory ratesodiumpotassiumcreatininehematocritwhite blood cell countGlasgow Coma Scaleblood oxygenation:A-a gradient (if FiO2 is greater than or equal to 0.5)PaO2 (if FiO2 is less than 0.5)A-a gradient (if FiO2 is greater than or equal to 0.5)PaO2 (if FiO2 is less than 0.5)Although designed for the calculation of mortality in an intensive care unit the APACHE score has high sensitivity for the prediction of complications of acute pancreatitis such as pancreatic necrosis and organ failure 3.The APACHE score was first developed in 1981 by the American intensivist William Knaus and his colleagues 1.
It was revised in 1985 to become the APACHE II score 2.
It is currently in its fourth iteration, however the APACHE II score is still the most commonly used.

Apert syndrome (also known as type I acrocephalosyndactyly) is a syndrome that is predominantly characterized by skull and limb malformations.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresImaging differential diagnosisThe estimated incidence is 1 case per 65-80,000 pregnancies.increased paternal age has been proposed 6CNS anomaliescongenital cardiac anomalies (10%)congenital genitourinary anomalies symphalangismApert syndrome was originally described as a triad of:craniosynostosis: brachycephalysyndactylymaxillary hypoplasiaHowever, other features may include:tower-shaped head and prominent foreheadhypertelorismintellectual retardation (IQ however can be normal)exophthalmosThought to occur from a defect on the fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) gene, located on chromosome 10q26.
It can be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait, although most cases are thought to be sporadic.
There are many abnormalities which may be visible on imaging including 3:craniofacialcraniosynostosis: brachycephalyfacial hypoplasialimbsyndactyly (tends to be complex)craniosynostosis: brachycephalyfacial hypoplasiasyndactyly (tends to be complex)Other more subtle features which may be evident include tower-shaped head and prominent forehead, hypertelorism and exophthalmos.
It is named after Eugene Apert (1868–1940) 7, French pediatrician, who described it in 1906, although some reports suggest it was first described by Wheaton in 1894 2.The differential includes other forms of acrocephalosyndactyly and acrocephalopolysyndactyly:Saethre-Chotzen syndromePfeiffer syndromeCarpenter syndromeCrouzon syndrome

Apgar score was originally described by Virginia Apgar (American anaesthesiologist, 1909-1974) in 1952.Helpfully, her surname is also a useful mnemonic for remembering the 5 factors: each is graded as 0, 1 or 2 with a total possible score of 10.
The lower the score the worse the prognosis.
The test is performed immediately after birth and then at 5 minutes.
A low score initially may simply indicate the neonate requires medical attention, whereas the latter at 5 minutes is associated with a poor prognosis.
Appearance (skin color):0: central cyanosis1: peripheral cyanosis (acrocyanosis)2: no cyanosisPulse:0: absent1: <100 bpm2: >100 bpmGrimace:0: no response to stimulation1: grimace/feeble cry when stimulated2: sneeze/cough/pulls away when stimulatedActivity (muscle tone):0: none1: some flexion2: active movementRespiration:0: absent1: weak or irregular2: strong

Aphakia (less commonly aphacia) is the absence of the lens from the ocular globe.
surgical removal of a cataract (commonest cause)traumacongenitalSurgical insertion of an intraocular lens implant, in which case the aphakic appearance is called pseudoaphakia instead.
Aphakia is derived from Ancient Greek roots. '
α' (a-) meaning negative, and 'φακος' (phakos) meaning a lentil, and by extension anything shaped like a lens.

Aphthoid ulcers are shallow ulcers of the gastrointestinal mucosa.infective inflammatory conditionsYersinia enterocolitisamoebic enterocolitiscytomegalovirus enterocolitisnoninfective inflammatory conditionsCrohn diseaseidiopathic granulomatous gastritisvasculitic conditionspolyarteritis nodosa (PAN)Behcet diseaseischemic colitisYersinia enterocolitisamoebic enterocolitiscytomegalovirus enterocolitisCrohn diseaseidiopathic granulomatous gastritispolyarteritis nodosa (PAN)Behcet diseaseischemic colitis

Apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (AHCM or ApHCM), also known as Yamaguchi syndrome, is a rare form of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy which usually involves the apex of the left ventricle, rarely involves the right ventricular apex, or involves both apices.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisHistory and etymologyDifferential diagnosisReferencesCases and figuresHistorically, this condition was thought to be confined to the Japanese population but it is also found in other populations.
Of all hypertrophic cardiomyopathy patients in Japan the prevalence of apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was 15-25% (cf.
US ~3%).Over half of patients with apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy are thought to be asymptomatic but the most common presenting symptom is chest pain, followed by palpitations, dyspnea and syncope.
It may also manifest as morbid events such as atrial fibrillation, myocardial infarction, embolic events, ventricular fibrillation and/or congestive heart failure.left ventricular hypertrophygiant (>10 mm in amplitude), negative T waves 12most pronounced in the mid to lateral precordial (V4-5) leadsmay correlate with severity of apical hypertrophy 13most pronounced in the mid to lateral precordial (V4-5) leadsmay correlate with severity of apical hypertrophy 13It is frequently sporadic.
An autosomal dominant inheritance has been reported in a few families where a sarcoma gene mutation (E101K mutation in the alpha-cardiac actin gene) has been identified 1.Some publications divide this into 3 subtypes:pure focal: considered most commonpure diffusemixedA "spade-like" configuration, or ace-of-spades sign, of the left ventricle is the classic appearance 6.Compared with other variants of HCM, the prognosis of apical hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is relatively benign.
The overall mortality rate of AHCM patients has been reported ~10.5% and cardiovascular mortality ~1.9% after a follow-up of 13.6 ± 8.3 years 1.The syndrome and its echocardiographic appearances were first described in 1979 by H Yamaguchi.
Possible differential considerations includeleft ventricular non-compaction 4

The apical ligament is a small ligament that joins the apex (tip) of the dens of C2 to the anterior margin (basion) of the foramen magnum.
It is the weak, fibrous remnant of the notochord and does not contribute significantly to stability.
The more posterior alar and cruciate ligaments are stronger and therefore far more clinically significant.
Anterior is the anterior atlanto-occipital membrane.
It may be absent in up to 20% 2.

Handy mnemonics to remember common apical lung diseases are:SET CARPCARPETS (anagram of SET CARP)S: sarcoidosisE: eosinophilic pneumoniaT: tuberculosisC: cystic fibrosisA: ankylosing spondylitisR: radiation pneumonitisP: pneumoconiosis

Apical periodontitis refers to a spectrum of diseases that occur around the tooth apex these can include 1:periapical granulomaperiapical abscessperiapical (radicular) cystApical periodontal disease of the maxillary teeth can extend into the maxillary sinuses with resultant odontogenic sinusitis.

Apical pleural cap refers to a curved density at the lung apex seen on chest radiograph.
The frequency of apical pleural thickening increases with age 3.It arises from a number of causes:pleural thickening/scarringidiopathic: chronic ischemic etiology is favored for most cases 4secondary to previous apical infection: typically pulmonary tuberculosisradiation fibrosispleuroparenchymal fibroelastosismay be present in up to 10% of radiographs 2Pancoast tumorhematomathoracic aortic injury 5upper thoracic spine injuryfractured 1st riblymphoma: extending from neck/mediastinumabscess within the neck/mediastinumidiopathic: chronic ischemic etiology is favored for most cases 4secondary to previous apical infection: typically pulmonary tuberculosisradiation fibrosispleuroparenchymal fibroelastosismay be present in up to 10% of radiographs 2thoracic aortic injury 5upper thoracic spine injuryfractured 1st rib

The apical zone is one of the four chest radiograph zones and an important location for missed diagnoses when reporting a frontal chest radiograph and makes up one of the "check areas".
It is sometimes thought of as a subdivision of the upper zone.
portion of the lungs that lie above the inferior margin of the clavicles on a frontal chest radiograph (see Figure 1) 2The apices and upper zones are preferentially affected by pathology that is related to inhalation.
The upper portion of the lungs have a positive ventilation mismatch when compared to the bases, where there is preferential perfusion.
Common conditions involving the apical zone include:sarcoidosisallergic bronchopulmnary aspergillosis (ABPA) extrinsic allergic alveolitispulmonary tuberculosisradiotherapy changes

Aplastic anemia is a rare hematopoietic stem-cell disorder.
The condition results in pancytopenia and hypocellular bone marrow.
Most cases are acquired, however, there are unusual inherited forms.
PathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesAplastic anemia manifests as a marked reduction in the number of pluripotent hematopoietic stem cells.
It is immune-mediated in most cases where autoreactive lymphocytes mediate the destruction of hematopoietic stem cells.
Environmental exposures (e.g. drugs, viruses, and toxins) are thought to initiate the aberrant immune response in some patients, but most cases are classified as idiopathic.
Signal characteristics follow differences in fatty versus haematopoetic marrow.
Reported patterns include 3:focal low-signal (both TI and T2) areas (likely representing islands of active hematopoietic cells) interspersed with high-SI areas in the marrow of the spine.
Note this pattern is also seen in lymphoma, metastases and myeloma.diffuse high-signal marrow without focal abnormalities in the pelvis and proximal femoral regionsMRI is also useful for assessment of response to treatment in aplastic anemia as well as other hematopoietic disorders 4.Similar to other autoimmune diseases, aplastic anemia has a varied clinical course which ranges from some patients having mild symptoms that necessitate little or no therapy to others presenting with life-threatening pancytopenia.
Acquired aplastic anemia can be effectively treated by allogeneic bone-marrow transplantation, immunosuppression (generally anti-thymocyte globulin and cyclosporin), and high-dose cyclophosphamide.development of paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria (PNH)development of myelodysplastic syndromeosteonecrosis of the hip 8

Apocrine carcinoma of the breast is a rare variant of breast cancer.
The diagnosis is mainly pathological as it is difficult to differentiate from other forms of breast cancer on imaging.
EpidemiologyPathologyTreatment and prognosisRelated articlesReferencesIt accounts for about 4% of all cases.
It is seen most often in females in the age group of 50-70 years.
Grossly it appears similar to other invasive breast carcinomas.
Microscopic appearance is of sheets, cords and at times tubules of neoplastic cells.
The primary features are that of large amounts of eosinophilic, granular cytoplasm, tumor cells with well-defined margins, and large vesicular nuclei.
The nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio is about 1:2.
They frequently reveal snouts which are accumulations of secreted granules in the apical cytoplasm, that is clearly revealed by staining dyes.
The six-year survival rate for moderate to high-grade apocrine breast cancer is thought to be between 70% and 80%.

Apocrine metaplasia of the breast is a benign breast condition and is sometimes considered part of or associated with fibrocystic change.
It is a common finding in the female breast, particularly after the age of 25, and many regard it as a normal component of the breast.
EpidemiologyPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisReferencesCases and figuresSeen mostly in women over the age of 50 years.
Metaplastic changes occur secondary to some kind of irritation, most often being a breast cyst.
Apocrine-like cells form in a lining of developing microcysts due to the increased intraluminal pressure caused by secretions.breast fibrocystic diseasepapillomahamartomafibroadenomaMammographic features are nonspecific.
There are no distinguishing mammographic features, although a new or enlarging lobular, microlobulated mass or heterogeneous calcification cluster may sometimes represent apocrine metaplasia.
When this is seen, a needle biopsy is required for definitive diagnosis 1.Ultrasound may show a cluster of small (2-5 mm) anechoic foci with intervening septae 3.When there is hyperplasia seen along with metaplasia there is an increased risk of developing breast cancer.

Apodia is a rare non-syndromic transverse terminal lower limb defect characterized by the congenital absence of the foot and ankle.
The remainder of the lower limb is present including both the tibia and fibular epiphyses.
It can be unilateral or bilateral.acheiriahemimelia

Apophyseal avulsion fractures of the pelvis and hip are relatively common among physically active adolescents and young adults.
EpidemiologyMechanismPathologySee alsoReferencesCases and figuresPelvic and hip apophyseal injuries typically occur in the 14 to 25 year age range.
Kicking sports, such as soccer, and gymnastics are frequently implicated.
Sudden forceful muscular contraction causes avulsion of the apophysis to which the tendon attaches.iliac crest: anterior abdominal wall musclesanterior superior iliac spine: tensor fascia lata and sartoriusanterior inferior iliac spine: straight head of rectus femorisgreater trochanter: gluteus medius and gluteus minimuslesser trochanter: iliopsoas muscleischial tuberosity: hamstring musclesbody and inferior ramus of pubis: thigh adductors and gracilisavulsion injuries

The apophyses (singular: apophysis) are the normal bony outgrowths that arise from separate ossification centers and eventually fuse with the bone in time.
The apophysis is a site of tendon or ligament attachment, as compared to the epiphysis which contributes to a joint.
When unfused, they can easily be mistaken for fractures.
Given the similar development with epiphyses, primary bone lesions that are typically located in the epiphyses can also occur in apophyses.
Sever diseaseOsgood Schlatter diseasediaphysismetaphysisepiphysisphysis

The apophysis of the proximal 5th metatarsal (plural apophyses) lies laterally and is oriented longitudinally parallel to the shaft.
Apophysis of the fifth metatarsal base appears on plain radiographs at age 12 for boys and 10 for girls.
Fusion of the apophysis to the metatarsal base usually occurs within the following 2-4 years 3,4.It should not be confused with an os peroneum or an avulsion fracture.
An avulsion fracture at this location is typically extra-articular and oriented transversally as compared to the longitudinal orientation of an unfused apophysis.
Iselin disease (apophysitis)

Apoptosis (plural: apoptoses), also known as programmed cell death (PCD) is a term to describe the process of regulated cell death.
This is in contrast to necrosis, which is unregulated cell death often secondary to external factors 1.Apoptosis occurs in cells which are destined to die by activation of specific genes.
These in turn cause activation of intrinsic enzymes causing degradation of cellular DNA and proteins.
The cell is then broken down into apoptotic bodies and removed by phagocytes.
Apoptosis occurs without breakdown of the plasma membrane and lack of leakage of cellular contents, in contrast to necrosis, preventing an inflammatory response 1.
Apoptosis can occur in both physiological and pathological scenarios.
Physiologic causes include: removal of cells during embryogenesiselimination of potentially self-reactive cells, such as T cells in the thymus 1Pathologic causes include:removal of cells injured beyond repair, for examples cells that have accumulated too much DNA damageremoval of cells in certain infections, such as virally-infected cells in an effort to prevent further infection 1

Apostrophes are used according to standard English grammar rules.
They are used for possessives and to indicate missing letters.
When using a possessive it's usually by adding "'s" at the end, e.g. "the patient's disease".
Apostrophes should not be used for pluralisation, e.g. "apostrophes" and not "apostrophe's".
The other main use is to indicate missing letters in so-called 'contractions', e.g. "it's", "don't" and "you're".
Some of these forms have notorious counterparts without an apostrophe that have a different meaning, e.g. its (possessive of it), your (possessive of you).
Although in written English, and hence Radiopaedia, generally the non-contracted form is preferred e.g. "cannot" instead of "can't", "we would" instead of "we'd" etc.
Although apostrophes were previously also used in the pluralisation of letters (B's), numbers and acronyms (ICD's) this use is becoming obsolete and we, therefore, advise against it and would write: Bs, ICDs, 5s, and Ss (for plural of 'S').
Read more about acronyms.
At Radiopaedia.org we think that the use of apostrophes should be as limited as possible.
In general, terms that often include apostrophes are mostly used in an adjectival sense and only in a very limited number of cases should the possessive nature of apostrophes be maintained for grammatical reasons.
Apostrophes in eponymsWhen to use apostrophesWhen not to use apostrophesRelated articlesA particular note should be made on eponyms as the use of apostrophes in eponyms is debated.
Many diseases, anatomical structures and landmarks are named after a person, either a patient, a doctor or someone entirely different (also see Stigler's law of eponymy).
There is variation in the spelling of such eponyms when it comes to the inclusion of an apostrophe, effectively alternating between using a possessive form (Down's syndrome) or a non-possessive form (Down syndrome).
The non-possessive form (without apostrophe) is becoming more common 1.
Radiopaedia.org aims for uniformity both regarding its own content and in the larger medical community and for this reason alone we prefer the non-possessive form.
Furthermore, the use of an apostrophe can lead to ambiguity related to the genitive use (Cushing's disease does not usually indicate that Cushing is diseased).The non-possessive form, however, is more simple and easier to use, having fewer letters and symbols (which are not always easy to find on any particular keyboard).
The dedicated employment of the non-possessive form will contribute to more simplicity, more efficient literature search strategies and less ambiguity.
Although dropping the apostrophe from well-known terms and eponyms might feel awkward initially, it's fairly easy to get used to and at Radiopaedia.org we would like to set an example.
Generally speaking, and mostly because of the plea above, Radiopaedia.org is in favor of omitting apostrophes wherever possible.
However, there are still some cases where it's necessary.
These include:anatomical structures that cannot be pluralised without becoming nonsense: Arnold's nerve, Waldeyer's ring, Bochdalek's flower basket, Lister's tubercle, Hoffa's fat padby using the rule of thumb with plurals other terms can do without an apostrophe: Morgagni hernia, Bochdalek hernia, Hoffa fracture, Meckel diverticulumterms that include a fixed phrase that includes an apostrophe: shepherd's crook deformity, bull's eye signby using the rule of thumb with plurals other terms can do without an apostrophe: Morgagni hernia, Bochdalek hernia, Hoffa fracture, Meckel diverticulumIn all other cases, Radiopaedia.org strongly encourages not using an apostrophe.
This includes many terms for which many people actually include an apostrophe and versions with or without apostrophes can be observed throughout the literature, clinical practice or presentations.
A non-exhaustive list of terms that can do without apostrophes:diseases: Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, De Quervain tenosynovitissyndromes: Down syndrome, Chilaiditi syndrome, Löfgren syndromesigns: Westermark sign, Rigler sign, Chilaiditi signlines: Shenton line, Perkin line, McGregor line

Appendiceal carcinoids are rare overall but represent the most common tumor of the appendix.
The appendix is also one of the most common (but not the most common) locations for gastrointestinal carcinoid tumors.
Clinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresTreatment and prognosisDifferential diagnosisRelated articlesReferencesAppendiceal carcinoids can present as the obstructive cause of acute appendicitis or less commonly a mucocele.
Often they are incidental findings 3.
Appendiceal carcinoids are neuroendocrine tumors that classically arise at the appendiceal tip from subepithelial neuroendocrine cells 4.Two types are described 4:classic typeGoblet cell carcinoidconsidered a distinct tumor, separate from classic neuroendocrine tumor, with its own evolving classification based on degree of differentiation 5considered a distinct tumor, separate from classic neuroendocrine tumor, with its own evolving classification based on degree of differentiation 5small (usually <1 cm), round masses or diffuse appendiceal thickeningmost commonly at the appendiceal tip (75%) 1,2Appendiceal carcinoids have a more benign course than other gastrointestinal carcinoids, rarely metastasizing, with a 5-year survival rate of >90% 2,3.Metastases, when they do occur are to regional nodes, and rarely the liver 6,7.other causes of mucocele of the appendix e.g. appendicolith, mucinous cystadenomaappendicitis other appendiceal neoplasmsmucinous cystadenocarcinoma: most common malignant neoplasm of the appendixcolonic adenocarcinomalymphomae.g.
appendicolith, mucinous cystadenomamucinous cystadenocarcinoma: most common malignant neoplasm of the appendixcolonic adenocarcinomalymphoma

Apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) is a measure of the magnitude of diffusion (of water molecules) within tissue, and is commonly clinically calculated using MRI with diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) 1.
Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) is widely appreciated as an indispensable tool in the examination of the CNS.
It is considered useful not only for the detection of acute ischemic stroke but also for the characterization and differentiation of brain tumors and intracranial infections.
DWI exploits the random motion of water molecules.
The extent of tissue cellularity and the presence of intact cell membrane help determine the impedance of water molecule diffusion.
This impedance of water molecules diffusion can be quantitatively assessed using the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) value.
This assessment can be done using different b values via changing gradient amplitude 2,3,6.
ADC values are calculated automatically by the software and then displayed as a parametric map that reflects the degree of diffusion of water molecules through different tissues.
Then, by use of a dedicated workstation, ADC measurements are recorded for a given region by drawing regions of interest (ROIs) on the ADC map 6.An ADC of tissue is expressed in units of mm2/s.
There is no unanimity regarding the boundaries of the range of normal diffusion, but ADC values less than 1.0 to 1.1 x  10-3 mm2/s (or 1000-1100 x 10-6 mm2/s) are generally acknowledged in adults as indicating restriction.
However, this is entirely dependent on the organ being imaged and the pathology 7.Some rough useful values (10-6 mm2/s) 8-10:white matter: 670-800cortical grey matter: 800-1000deep grey matter: 700-850 CSF: 3000-3400astrocytomaGrade II: 1273 ± 293Grade III: 1067 ± 276Grade IV: 745 ± 135Grade II: 1273 ± 293Grade III: 1067 ± 276Grade IV: 745 ± 135Diffusion changes are correlated to the clinical deficit and are potentially useful for early diagnosis and longitudinal evaluation, especially in the context of pharmacological trials.

Appendiceal diverticulitis (plural diverticulitides) is a rare condition in which there is acute inflammation of a diverticulum arising from the vermiform appendix.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresHistory and etymologyRelated articlesReferencesCases and figuresHistorically appendiceal diverticulitis has been thought to be a rare diagnosis.
However a study from 2015 which retrospectively reviewed the pathological specimens in 451 patients that had appendectomies found that 9.7% were actually appendiceal diverticulitis 3.
The presentation is very similar to acute appendicitis, and occasionally an acute appendiceal diverticulitis will be the cause of right iliac fossa pain in an acutely unwell patient.
Appendiceal diverticula are false diverticula in that they represent focal protrusions of the mucosa and submucosa through a muscle defect; this is histologically identical to colonic diverticula.
In appendiceal diverticulitis there is acute inflammation of the diverticulum with very little or completely absent inflammation of the appendiceal wall (cf.
appendicitis) 3.
An acutely inflamed diverticulum arising from the appendix will be seen in uncomplicated cases.
However when there is an abscess it can be impossible to differentiate an appendiceal diverticulitis from an appendicitis.
Compared to acute appendicitis, the following features are more likely to be seen:periappendiceal fluidperiappendiceal fat strandinglarger caliber of the appendixCompared to acute appendicitis, the following features are less likely to be seen:loculated intraluminal fluidappendiceal abscessappendicolithThe first case description of diverticulitis of the appendix was published in 1893 by British physician Theophilus Nicholas Kelynack 3.

Appendiceal intussusception happens when appendix segment is pulled into itself or into the cecum.
This condition can mimic various chronic and acute abdominal conditions.
It is an important entity to recognize since it could be mistaken for a cecal mass.
EpidemiologyClinical presentationPathologyRadiographic featuresDifferential diagnosis ReferencesCases and figuresAppendiceal intussusception is a rare condition, with an estimated incidence of 0.01% of patients who underwent appendectomy 1.Symptoms of appendiceal intussusception have been divided into four groups: asymptomatic patientssymptoms similar to acute appendicitissymptoms consistent with intestinal intussusception: abdominal pain and vomiting occur for several days; bowel movements may be normal, or less frequently, there is constipation, diarrhea or melenaa prolonged history of intermittent severe attacks of right lower quadrant abdominal pain.
Vomiting and melena may be presentThe diagnosis is rarely made preoperatively because of its variable presentation and unspecific symptoms.
Appendiceal intussusception can occur without any underlying abnormality.
Anatomical variations of the appendix and pathological conditions such as tumors or polyps, endometriosis, parasitism, cystic fibrosis, fecaliths and foreign bodies, have all been described as possible causes.
In most cases the radiographic findings are normal.
When there is associated small bowel obstruction, abdominal radiographs can demonstrate features thereof (i.e. dilated small bowel loops with air-fluid levels).Ultrasonography has a role, especially in children.
Longitudinal sonograms may show the inverted appendix protruding into the cecal lumen.
Similar findings to the intestinal intussusception can be seen, which include:target sign (also known as the doughnut sign)pseudokidney signcrescent in a doughnut signCT is the most commonly used diagnostic modality.
A CT scan can clearly show the appendix invaginated into the cecal lumen (see case 1).The appearance of bowel-within-bowel, which identifies the appendix surrounded by the cecum, can be seen.
On imaging, differential considerations includececal tumorileocecal intussusception

